
Linderwall was a large kingdom, just east of the Mountains of Morning, where
philosophers were highly respected and the number five was fashionable. The
climate was unremarkable. The knights kept their armor brightly polished
mainly for show—it had been centuries since a dragon had come east. There
were the usual periodic problems with royal children and uninvited fairy
godmothers, but they were always the sort of thing that could be cleared up by
finding the proper prince or princess to marry the unfortunate child a few years
later. All in all, Linderwall was a very prosperous and pleasant place. Cimorene
hated it.

Cimorene was the youngest daughter of the King of Linderwall, and her parents
found her rather trying. Their first six daughters were perfectly normal
princesses, with long, golden hair and sweet dispositions, each more beautiful
than the last. Cimorene was lovely enough, but her hair was jet black, and she
wore it in braids instead of curled and pinned like her sisters.

And she wouldn’t stop growing. Her parents were quite sure that no prince
would want to marry a girl who could look him in the eye instead of gazing up at
him becomingly through her lashes. As for the girl’s disposition—well, when
people were being polite, they said she was strong-minded. When they were
angry or annoyed with her, they said she was as stubborn as a pig.

The King and Queen did the best they could. They hired the most superior tutors
and governesses to teach Cimorene all the things a princess ought to know—
dancing, embroidery, drawing, and etiquette. There was a great deal of etiquette,
from the proper way to curtsy before a visiting prince to how loudly it was
permissible to scream when being carried off by a giant. (Linderwall still had an
occasional problem with giants.)

Cimorene found it all very dull, but she pressed her lips together and learned it
anyway. When she couldn’t stand it any longer, she would go down to the castle
armory and bully the armsmaster into giving her a fencing lesson. As she got
older, she found her regular lessons more and more boring. Consequently, the
fencing lessons became more and more frequent.

When she was twelve, her father found out.
“Fencing is not proper behavior for a princess,” he told her in the gentle-but-firm
tone recommended by the court philosopher.

Cimorene tilted her head to one side. “Why not?”

“It’s ... well, it’s simply not done.”

Cimorene considered. “Aren’t I a princess?”

“Yes, of course you are, my dear,” said her father with relief. He had been
bracing himself for a storm of tears, which was the way his other daughters
reacted to reprimands.

“Well, I fence,” Cimorene said with the air of one delivering an unshakable
argument. “So it is too done by a princess.”

“That doesn’t make it proper, dear,” put in her mother gently.

“Why not?”

“It simply doesn’t,” the Queen said firmly, and that was the end of Cimorene’s
fencing lessons.

When she was fourteen, her father discovered that she was making the court
magician teach her magic.

“How long has this been going on?” he asked wearily when she arrived in
response to his summons.

“Since you stopped my fencing lessons,” Cimorene said. “I suppose you’re
going to tell me it isn’t proper behavior for a princess.”

“Well, yes. I mean, it isn’t proper.”

“Nothing interesting seems to be proper,” Cimorene said.

“You might find things more interesting if you applied yourself a little more,
dear,” Cimorene’s mother said.

“I doubt it,” Cimorene muttered, but she knew better than to argue when her
mother used that tone of voice. And that was the end of the magic lessons.
The same thing happened over the Latin lessons from the court philosopher, the
cooking lessons from the castle chef, the economics lessons from the court
treasurer, and the juggling lessons from the court minstrel. Cimorene began to
grow rather tired of the whole business.

When she was sixteen, Cimorene summoned her fairy godmother.

“Cimorene, my dear, this sort of thing really isn’t done,” the fairy said, fanning
away the scented blue smoke that had accompanied her appearance.

“People keep telling me that,” Cimorene said.

“You should pay attention to them, then,” her godmother said irritably. “I’m not
used to being hauled away from my tea without warning. And you aren’t
supposed to call me unless it is a matter of utmost importance to your life and
future happiness.”

“It is of utmost importance to my life and future happiness,” Cimorene said.

“Oh, very well. You’re a bit young to have fallen in love already; still, you
always have been a precocious child. Tell me about him.”

Cimorene sighed. “It isn’t a him.”

“Enchanted, is he?” the fairy said with a spark of interest. “A frog, perhaps? That
used to be quite popular, but it seems to have gone out of fashion lately.
Nowadays, all the princes are talking birds, or dogs, or hedgehogs.”

“No, no, I’m not in love with anyone!”

“Then what, exactly, is your problem?” the fairy said in exasperation.

“This!” Cimorene gestured at the castle around her. “Embroidery lessons, and
dancing, and—and being a princess!”

“My dear Cimorene!” the fairy said, shocked. “It’s your heritage!”

“It’s boring.”

“Boring?” The fairy did not appear to believe what she was hearing.
“Boring. I want to do things, not sit around all day and listen to the court
minstrel make up songs about how brave Daddy is and how lovely his wife and
daughters are.”

“Nonsense, my dear. This is just a stage you’re going through. You’ll outgrow it
soon, and you’ll be very glad you didn’t do anything rash.”

Cimorene looked at her godmother suspiciously. “You’ve been talking to my
parents, haven’t you?”

“Well, they do try to keep me up to date on what my godchildren are doing.”

“I thought so,” said Cimorene, and bade her fairy godmother a polite good-bye.

A few weeks later, Cimorene’s parents took her to a tourney in Sathem-by-the-
Mountains, the next kingdom over. Cimorene was quite sure that they were only
taking her because her fairy godmother had told them that something had better
be done about her, and soon. She kept this opinion to herself. Anything was
better than the endless rounds of dancing and embroidery lessons at home.

Cimorene realized her mistake almost as soon as they reached their destination,
for the King of Sathem-by-the-Mountains had a son. He was a golden-haired,
blue-eyed, and exceedingly handsome prince, whose duties appeared to consist
entirely of dancing attendance on Cimorene.

“Isn’t he handsome!” Cimorene’s lady-in-waiting sighed.

“Yes,” Cimorene said without enthusiasm. “Unfortunately, he isn’t anything
else.”

“Whatever do you mean?” the lady-in-waiting said in astonishment.

“He has no sense of humor, he isn’t intelligent, he can’t talk about anything
except tourneys, and half of what he does say he gets wrong. I’m glad we’re
only staying three weeks. I don’t think I could stand to be polite to him for much
longer than that.”

“But what about your engagement?” the lady-in-waiting cried, horrified.

“What engagement?” Cimorene said sharply.
The lady-in-waiting tried to mutter something about a mistake, but Cimorene put
up her chin in her best princess fashion and insisted on an explanation. Finally,
the lady-in-waiting broke down.

“I ... I overheard Their Majesties discussing it yesterday.” She sniffled into her
handkerchief. “The stipulations and covenants and contracts and settlements
have all been drawn up, and they’re going to sign them the day after tomorrow
and announce it on Th-Thursday.”

“I see,” said Cimorene. “Thank you for telling me. You may go.”

The lady-in-waiting left, and Cimorene went to see her parents. They were
annoyed and a little embarrassed to find that Cimorene had discovered their
plans, but they were still very firm about it. “We were going to tell you
tomorrow, when we signed the papers,” her father said.

“We knew you’d be pleased, dear,” her mother said, nodding. “He’s such a good-
looking boy.”

“But I don’t want to marry Prince Therandil,” Cimorene said.

“Well, it’s not exactly a brilliant match,” Cimorene’s father said, frowning. “But
I didn’t think you’d care how big his kingdom is.”

“It’s the prince I don’t care for,” Cimorene said.

“That’s a great pity, dear, but it can’t be helped,” Cimorene’s mother said
placidly. “I’m afraid it isn’t likely that you’ll get another offer.”

“Then I won’t get married at all.”

Both her parents looked slightly shocked. “My dear Cimorene!” said her father.
“That’s out of the question. You’re a princess; it simply isn’t done.”

“I’m too young to get married!”

“Your Great-Aunt Rose was married at sixteen,” her mother pointed out. “One
really can’t count all those years she spent asleep under that dreadful fairy’s
curse.”
“I won’t marry the prince of Sathem-by-the-Mountains!” Cimorene said
desperately. “It isn’t proper!”

“What?” said both her parents together.

“He hasn’t rescued me from a giant or an ogre or freed me from a magic spell,”
Cimorene said.

Both her parents looked uncomfortable. “Well, no,” said Cimorene’s father. “It’s
a bit late to start arranging it, but we might be able to manage something.”

“I don’t think it’s necessary,” Cimorene’s mother said. She looked reprovingly at
Cimorene. “You’ve never paid attention to what was or wasn’t suitable before,
dear; you can’t start now. Proper or not, you will marry Prince Therandil three
weeks from Thursday.”

“But, Mother—”

“I’ll send the wardrobe mistress to your room to start fitting your bride clothes,”
Cimorene’s mother said firmly, and that was the end of the conversation.

Cimorene decided to try a more direct approach. She went to see Prince
Therandil. He was in the castle armory, looking at swords. “Good morning.
Princess,” he said when he finally noticed Cimorene. “Don’t you think this is a
lovely sword?”

Cimorene picked it up. “The balance is off.”

“I believe you’re right,” said Therandil after a moment’s study. “Pity; now I’ll
have to find another. Is there something I can do for you?”

“Yes,” said Cimorene. “You can not marry me.”

“What?” Therandil looked confused.

“You don’t really want to marry me, do you?” Cimorene said coaxingly.

“Well, not exactly,” Therandil replied. “I mean, in a way. That is—”

“Oh, good,” Cimorene said, correctly interpreting this muddled reply as No, not
at all. “Then you’ll tell your father you don’t want to marry me?”

“I couldn’t do that!” Therandil said, shocked. “It wouldn’t be right.”

“Why not?” Cimorene demanded crossly.

“Because—because—well, because princes just don’t do that!”

“Then how are you going to keep from marrying me?”

“I guess I won’t be able to,” Therandil said after thinking hard for a moment.
“How do you like that sword over there? The one with the silver hilt?”

Cimorene left in disgust and went out to the castle garden. She was very
discouraged. It looked as if she were going to marry the prince of Sathem-by-
the-Mountains whether she wanted to or not.

“I’d rather be eaten by a dragon,” she muttered.

“That can be arranged,” said a voice from beside her left slipper.

Cimorene looked down and saw a small green frog looking up at her. “I beg your
pardon. Did you speak?” she asked.

“You don’t see anyone else around, do you?” said the frog.

“Oh!” said Cimorene. She had never met a talking frog before. “Are you an
enchanted prince?” she asked a little doubtfully.

“No, but I’ve met a couple of them, and after a while you pick up a few things,”
said the frog. “Now, why is it that you want to be eaten by a dragon?”

“My parents want me to marry Prince Therandil,” Cimorene explained.

“And you don’t want to? Sensible of you,” said the frog. “I don’t like Therandil.
He used to skip rocks across the top of my pond. They always sank into my
living room.”

“I’m sorry,” Cimorene said politely.

“Well,” said the frog, “what are you going to do about it?”
“Marrying Therandil? I don’t know. I’ve tried talking to my parents, but they
won’t listen, and neither will Therandil.”

“I didn’t ask what you’d said about it,” the frog snapped. “I asked what you’re
going to do. Nine times out of ten, talking is a way of avoiding doing things.”

“What kinds of things would you suggest?” Cimorene said, stung.

“You could challenge the prince to a duel,” the frog suggested.

“He’d win,” Cimorene said. “It’s been four years since I’ve been allowed to do
any fencing.”

“You could turn him into a toad.”

“I never got past invisibility in my magic lessons,” Cimorene said.
“Transformations are advanced study.”

The frog looked at her disapprovingly. “Can’t you do anything?”

“I can curtsy,” Cimorene said disgustedly. “I know seventeen different country
dances, nine ways to agree with an ambassador from Cathay without actually
promising him anything, and one hundred and forty-three embroidery stitches.
And I can make cherries jubilee.”

“Cherries jubilee?” asked the frog, and snapped at a passing fly.

“The castle chef taught me, before Father made him stop,” Cimorene explained.

The frog munched briefly, then swallowed and said, “I suppose there’s no help
for it. You’ll have to run away.”

“Run away?” Cimorene said. “I don’t like that idea. Too many things could go
wrong.”

“You don’t like the idea of marrying Prince Therandil, either,” the frog pointed
out.

“Maybe I can think of some other way out of getting married.”

The frog snorted. “Such as?” Cimorene didn’t answer, and after a moment the
frog said, “I thought so. Do you want my advice or not?”

“Yes, please,” said Cimorene. After all, she didn’t have to follow it.

“Go to the main road outside the city and follow it away from the mountains,”
said the frog. “After a while, you will come to a small pavilion made of gold,
surrounded by trees made of silver with emerald leaves. Go straight past it
without stopping, and don’t answer if anyone calls out to you from the pavilion.
Keep on until you reach a hovel. Walk straight up to the door and knock three
times, then snap your fingers and go inside. You’ll find some people there who
can help you out of your difficulties if you’re polite about asking and they’re in
the right mood. And that’s all.”

The frog turned abruptly and dove into the pool. “Thank you very much,”
Cimorene called after it, thinking that the frog’s advice sounded very odd indeed.
She rose and went back into the castle.

She spent the rest of the day being fitted and fussed over by her ladies-in-waiting
until she was ready to scream. By the end of the formal banquet, at which she
had to sit next to Prince Therandil and listen to endless stories of his prowess in
battle, Cimorene was more than ready to take the frog’s advice.

Late that night, when most of the castle was asleep, Cimorene bundled up five
clean handkerchiefs and her best crown. Then she dug out the notes she had
taken during her magic lessons and carefully cast a spell of invisibility. It seemed
to work, but she was still very watchful as she sneaked out of the castle. After
all, it had been a long time since she had practiced.

By morning, Cimorene was well outside the city and visible again, walking
down the main road that led away from the mountains. It was hot and dusty, and
she began to wish she had brought a bottle of water instead of the handkerchiefs.

Just before noon, she spied a small grove of trees next to the road ahead of her. It
looked like a cool, pleasant place to rest for a few minutes, and she hurried
forward. When she reached the grove, however, she saw that the trees were made
of the finest silver, and their shining green leaves were huge emeralds. In the
center of the grove stood a charming pavilion made of gold and hung with gold
curtains.

Cimorene slowed down and looked longingly at the cool green shade beneath the
trees. Just then a woman’s voice called out from the pavilion, “My dear, you
look so tired and thirsty! Come and sit with me and share my luncheon.”

The voice was so kind and coaxing that Cimorene took two steps toward the
edge of the road before she remembered the frog’s advice. Oh, no, she thought to
herself, I’m not going to be caught this easily! She turned without saying
anything and hurried on down the road.

A little farther on she came to a tiny, wretched-looking hovel made of cracked
and weathered gray boards. The door hung slantwise on a broken hinge, and the
whole building looked as though it were going to topple over at any moment.
Cimorene stopped and stared doubtfully at it, but she had followed the frog’s
advice this far, and she thought it would be silly to stop now. So she shook the
dust from her skirts and put on her crown (so as to make a good impression). She
marched up to the door, knocked three times, and snapped her fingers just as the
frog had told her. Then she pushed the door open and went in.
Cimorene watched Therandil go with feelings of great relief. Now she had at
least a month to find a permanent way of discouraging the knights, for she was
quite certain that Therandil would spread the news of her “injury.” She decided
to put up her sign anyway, just in case, and after a little looking she found a
scrubby tree beside the path and hung the sign on it.

On her way back to Kazul’s cave, she noticed that the two pieces of the ledge
were still invisible, and she was very careful about crossing them. She looked
down once, out of curiosity, and was immediately sorry. She was not
comfortable with the sight of her own feet firmly planted on nothing at all, with
the sharp, spiky tops of spruce trees in full view some fifty feet below

Kazul arrived only a few minutes after Cimorene herself. Cimorene was looking
for some thread to mend her skirts (which had gotten torn and stained while she
was climbing along the ledge) when she heard the mistakable sounds of a dragon
sliding into the main cave.

“Cimorene?” Kazul’s voice called.

“Coming,” Cimorene called back, abandoning her search. She picked up her
lamp and hurried out to greet Kazul.

“I’m glad to see you’re still here,” Kazul said mildly as Cimorene came into the
large cave. “Moranz was quite sure you’d run off with a knight or a wizard. I
couldn’t make out for certain which.”

“Is Moranz the yellow-green dragon who wanted to eat me?” Cimorene asked.
“Because if he is, he’s just trying to make trouble.”

“I’m well aware of that,” Kazul said with a sigh that sent a-burnt-bread smell
halfway across the cave. “But things would be easier for me if you didn’t
provide him with any material to make trouble with. Exactly what happened?”

“Well, Morwen came to visit this afternoon,” Cimorene began. “We were talking
about all the ... interruptions I’ve been having, and she suggested putting up a
sign ...” She explained why she had gone to put up the sign herself and told
Kazul in detail about her meetings with the wizard, the dragon, and the prince.

“So Morwen was here,” Kazul said. She sat back, and the scales on her tail
rattled comfortably against the floor. “That simplifies matters. Did you bring the
sign back with you?”

“No, I found a tree and hung it by the path,” Cimorene said, wondering what this
was all about, “in case Therandil doesn’t tell everyone about my ankle after all.”

“Better still,” Kazul said, and smiled fiercely, showing all her teeth. “Moranz is
going to regret meddling.”

“Meddling in what?”

“My business.”

“I’d like a little more of an explanation than that, if you don’t mind giving one,”
Cimorene said with a touch of exasperation.

Kazul looked startled, then thoughtful. Then she nodded. “I keep forgetting that
you’re not as empty-headed as most princesses,” she said. “Sit down and make
yourself comfortable. This may take a while.”

Cimorene found a rock and sat on it. Kazul settled into a more restful position,
folded her wings neatly along her back, and began. “It has to do with status.
Dragons aren’t required to have princesses, you see. Most of us don’t. There are
never enough to go around, and some of us prefer not to have to deal with the
annoyances that come with them.”

“Knights,” Cimorene guessed.

“Among other things,” Kazul said, nodding. “So having a princess in residence
has become a minor mark of high status among dragons.”

“A minor mark?”

Kazul smiled. “I’m afraid so. It’s the equivalent of, oh, serving expensive
imported fruit at dinner. It’s a nice way of showing everyone how rich you are,
but you could make just as big an impression by having some of those fancy
pastries with the smooth glazed icing and spun-sugar roses.”

“I see.” Cimorene did see, though she found herself wishing that Kazul had
found something else to compare it to. The talk of dinner reminded her too much
of Moranz’s repeated desire to eat her.
“Moranz is young and not very bright, I’m afraid,” Kazul said, almost as if she
had read Cimorene’s mind. “He seems to have the mistaken impression that if a
princess behaves badly, it reflects on the dragon who captured her. Possibly it
comes from his inability to keep any of his own princesses for more than a week.
Some of the lesser dragons were very snide about it when he lost his third one in
a row. I believe she sneaked out while he was napping.”

“I don’t see how he can blame his princesses,” Cimorene objected. “I mean, if
most princesses are unwilling, it must be fairly usual for them to try to get
away.”

“Of course, but Moranz doesn’t see it that way. He’s been trying to catch
someone else’s princess in a similar foolishness for years, and he’s quite sure
he’s finally done so. He’s undoubtedly spreading the story of your escape far and
wide at this very minute.”

“Oh, dear,” said Cimorene.

Kazul smiled again, and her teeth glittered silver in the lamplight. “He’ll look
extremely foolish when it becomes obvious that you’re still here. Which is one
reason I’ve asked a few of my friends to dinner tonight.”

“You’ve what?” Cimorene said. All her worries about Moranz were instantly
replaced by worries about fixing dinner on short notice for an unknown number
of dragons. “How many? What time will they be here? Where are we going to
put them all?”

“Six. Around eight-thirty. In the banquet cave. And you won’t be doing anything
but dessert. I’ve already arranged for the rest of the meal.”

“Arranged? With whom?”

“Ballimore the giantess. She’s loaned me the Cauldron of Plenty that she uses
when her twelve-headed son-in-law drops in for dinner unannounced. It’ll
handle most things, but all it can produce in the way of dessert is burned mint
custard and sour-cream-and-onion ice cream.”

“Ugh!” said Cimorene. “I see your problem.”

“Exactly. Can you manage?”
“Not if you want cherries jubilee,” Cimorene said, frowning. “I haven’t got a pot
large enough to make seven dragons’ worth of cherries jubilee. Would chocolate
mousse do? I can make two or three batches, and there should be time for all of
them to chill if you’re not starting until eight-thirty.”

“Chocolate mousse will be fine,” Kazul assured her. “Come along and I’ll show
you where to bring it.”

Cimorene picked up a lamp and followed Kazul into the public tunnels that
surrounded Kazul’s private caves. She was a little surprised, but when she saw
the size of the banquet cave, she understood. It was enormous. Fifty or sixty
dragons, perhaps even a hundred of them, would fit into it quite comfortably.
Obviously it had to be a public room; there simply wasn’t enough space under
the Mountains of Morning for every dragon to have a cave this size.

Kazul made sure Cimorene could find her way to the banquet cave without help
and then left her in the kitchen to melt slabs of chocolate and whip gallons of
cream for the mousse. By the time she finished, she was hot and tired, and all
she really wanted to do was to take a nap. But Kazul was expecting her to serve
the mousse, and Cimorene wasn’t about to appear before all those dragons in her
old clothes with sweaty straggles of hair sticking to her neck and a smear of
chocolate across her nose, so instead of napping, she pumped a cauldron of
water, heated it on the kitchen fire, and took a bath.

Once she was clean she felt much better. She checked to make sure the mousse
was setting properly, then went into her own rooms to decide what she should
wear. Unfortunately, she was afraid she didn’t have much choice. The wardrobe
in her bedroom was full of neat, serviceable dresses suitable for cooking in or
rummaging through treasure, but the only dressy clothes she had were the ones
she had arrived in. She got them out of the back of the wardrobe and found to
her dismay that the hem of the gown was badly stained with mud from her long
walk. There was no time to clean it; she would have to wear one of the everyday
dresses.

With a sigh Cimorene turned back to the wardrobe and opened it once more to
look for the nicest of the ordinary clothes. She gasped in surprise. The hangers
were now full of the most beautiful gowns she had ever seen. Some were silk,
and some were velvet; some were heavy brocade, and some were layers of
feather-light gauze; some were embroidered with gold or silver, and some were
sewn with jewels.

“Well, of course,” Cimorene said aloud after a stunned moment. “Why would a
dragon have an ordinary wardrobe? Of course it’s magic. What’s in it depends on
what I’m looking for.”

One of the wardrobe doors waggled slightly, and its hinges creaked in smug
agreement. Cimorene blinked at it, then shook herself and began looking through
the gowns.

She chose one of red velvet, heavily embroidered with gold, and found matching
slippers in the bottom of the obliging wardrobe. She let her black hair hang in
loose waves nearly to her feet and even dug her crown out of the back of the
drawer where she’d stuffed it on her first night. She finished getting ready a few
minutes early. Feeling very cheerful, she went to the kitchen to fetch the mousse.

It took Cimorene four trips to get the mousse down to the serving area just off
the banquet cave. A dragon-sized serving was a little over a bucketful, and she
could barely manage to carry two at a time. When everything was ready, she
stood in the serving area and waited nervously for Kazul to ring for dessert. She
could hear the muffled booming of the dragons’ voices through the heavy oak
door, but she could not make out what any of them were saying.

The bell rang at last, summoning Cimorene to serve dessert. She carried the
mousse into the banquet cavern, two servings at a time, and set it in front of
Kazul and her guests. The dragons were crouched around a shoulder-high slab of
white stone. Cimorene had to be very careful about lifting the mousse up onto it.
Fortunately, she didn’t have to wonder which dragon to serve first. She could tell
which dragons were most important from their places at the table, and she made
a silent apology to her protocol teacher, who had insisted that she learn about
seating arrangements. (Protocol had been one of the princess lessons Cimorene
had hated most.)

As she set the last serving in front of Kazul, one of the other dragons said in a
disgruntled and vaguely familiar voice, “I see the rumors are wrong again,
Kazul. Or did you have to go after her and haul her back the way the rest of us
do?”

Cimorene turned angrily, but before she could say anything, a large gray-green
dragon on the other side of the stone slab said, “Nonsense, Woraug! Girl’s got
more sense than that. You shouldn’t listen to gossip. Next thing you know, you’ll
be chasing after that imaginary wizard Gaurim’s been on about.” Cimorene
recognized the speaker at once. He was Roxim, the elderly dragon she had given
four of her handkerchiefs to.

“I suppose it was that idiot Moranz again, trying to cause trouble,” a purple-
green dragon said with bored distaste. “Someone should do something about
him.”

“Kazul still hasn’t answered my question,” Woraug said, and his tail lashed once
like the tail of an angry cat. “And I’d like her to do so if the rest of you will stop
sidetracking the conversation.”

“Here, now!” Roxim said indignantly. “That's a bit strong, Woraug! Too strong,
if you ask me.”

“I didn’t,” Woraug said. “I asked Kazul. And I’m still waiting.”

“I’m very pleased with my princess,” Kazul said mildly. “And no, I didn’t have
to haul her back, as you would realize if you’d given the matter a little thought.
Or does your princess normally leave seven servings of chocolate mousse in the
kitchen when she runs away?”

“Hear, hear!” Roxim said.

Cimorene noted with interest that Woraug’s scales had turned an even brighter
shade of green than normal and that he was starting to smell faintly of brimstone.

“One of these days you’ll go too far, Kazul,” he said.

“You started it,” Kazul pointed out. She turned to the gray dragon. “What's this
about Gaurim and a wizard, Roxim?”

“You haven’t heard?” Roxim said, sounding surprised. “Gaurim’s been raving
about it for weeks. Somebody snuck into her cave and stole a book from her
library. No traces, but for some reason she’s positive it was a wizard. Achoo!”
Roxim sneezed, emitting a ball of flame that just missed hitting his bowl of
mousse. “Gives me an allergy attack just thinking about it.”

“If it wasn’t a wizard, who was it?” the dragon at the far end of the table asked.
“Could have been anybody—an elf, a dwarf, even a human,” Roxim responded.
“No reason to think it was a wizard just because Gaurim didn’t catch him in the
act. Not with the amount of time she spends away from home.”

“Which book did she lose?” said the thin, brownish-green dragon next to Kazul.

“What does it matter?” the purple-green dragon muttered. “Some history or
other. And that’s another thing— what would a wizard want with a history book?
No, no, Gaurim’s making a lot of fuss over a common thief. That’s what I say.”

“It could have been a wizard,” said the dragon at the far end. “Who knows why
they want the things they want?”

“Ridiculous!” Roxim replied with vigor. “A wizard wouldn’t dare come through
this part of the mountains. They know what we’d do to ‘em, by George! Beg
pardon,” he added to the silver-green dragon next to him, who appeared to have
been rather shocked by his language.

“I’m afraid you’re wrong there,” Kazul said. “Cimorene met one today, less than
a two-minute flight from my cave.”

“What? What?” Roxim said. “You’re sure?”

“That's done it.” The purple-green dragon rolled his head in an irritated gesture,
so that his scales made a scratching noise as they rubbed together. “You’ll never
get him to quit talking about it now.”

“Quite sure,” Cimorene assured Roxim, after glancing at Kazul to make sure she
was expected to answer Roxim’s question for herself. “He made two bits of the
ledge I was standing on turn invisible so I would think it wasn’t safe to keep
going.”

“Certainly sounds like a wizard to me,” the dragon at the far end commented.

“What did he look like?” asked the silver-green dragon.

Cimorene described the wizard as well as she could, then added, “He said his
name was Zemenar.”

“Zemenar? That’s ridiculous!” Woraug snorted. “Zemenar was elected head of
the Society of Wizards last year. He wouldn’t waste his time playing games with
somebody’s princess.”

“Not unless he had a great deal to gain by it,” the thin dragon said in a thoughtful
tone. She turned her head and looked speculatively at Cimorene.

“Such as?” Woraug said. He waited a moment, but no one answered. “No, I can’t
believe it was Zemenar. The girl’s made a mistake; that’s all.”

“Perhaps it wasn’t him,” Cimorene said, holding on to her temper as hard as she
could. “I’ve never met Zemenar, so I wouldn’t know. But that’s who he said he
was.”

“And wouldn’t it be amusing if she were right?” the purple-green dragon said,
showing some interest in the proceedings for the first time.

“I don’t see that it matters,” the silver-green dragon said. “The important thing is
that he was a wizard, poking around smack in the middle of our mountains.
What are we going to do about it?”

“Tell King Tokoz,” Roxim said. “His job to handle this sort of thing, isn’t it?”

“What can Tokoz do about it?” Woraug said, and there was a faint undercurrent
of contempt in his tone.

“He could use the King’s Crystal to find out what the wizards are really doing,”
the thin dragon said in a prim tone.

“He won’t use the crystal for anything less than a full-fledged war,” Woraug
said. “And why should he? What could Tokoz do even if he did find out some
wizard was preying on poor defenseless dragons like Gaurim?”

“Lodge a formal protest with the Society of Wizards,” Roxim answered
promptly, ignoring Woraug’s sarcasm. “Proper thing to do, no question. Then the
next time anyone sees a wizard ...” His voice trailed off, and he snapped his teeth
together suggestively.

“He’d probably just set up a committee,” the purple-green dragon said. “Can’t
anyone think of something else?”
“I don’t think we should do anything until we have some idea what Zemenar was
after,” said the thin dragon. “It could be important.”

“We have to do something!” the silver-green dragon said. Her claws clashed
against the stone table. “We can’t have wizards wandering in and out whenever
they please! Why, we’d lose half our magic in no time.”

“Not to mention everyone sneezing themselves silly every time one of those
dratted staffs gets too close,” added the dragon at the far end.

The dragons began arguing among themselves about what to do and how best to
do it. It reminded Cimorene of the way her father’s ministers argued. Everyone
seemed to agree that something ought to be done about the wizards, but they
each had a different idea about what was appropriate. Roxim insisted huffily that
the only thing to do was to inform the King, who would then make a formal
protest. The thin dragon wanted to find out what the wizards were up to (she
didn’t say how this was to be done) before anyone tried to chase them off. The
silver-green dragon wanted patrols sent out immediately to eat any wizard who
ventured into the Mountains of Morning. The dragon at the far end of the table
wanted to attack the headquarters of the Society of Wizards the following
morning, and the purple-green dragon thought it would be most entertaining to
wait and see what the wizards did next. Woraug was the only one of the guests
who did not have a proposal, though he made occasional comments, usually
sarcastic ones, about everyone else’s suggestions.

Kazul did not say anything at all. Cimorene was at first surprised and then
puzzled by her silence, since Kazul was the one who had set the whole
discussion going to begin with. As the argument grew more heated, however,
Cimorene began to be glad that there was at least one dragon present who was
not involved in it. The dragon at the far end of the table was starting to breathe
little tongues of fire at the purple-green dragon, and Roxim was threatening
loudly to have another allergy attack, but Cimorene was fairly sure that Kazul
would stop the discussion before things got completely out of hand.

She was right. A moment later, while the dragon at the far end was taking a deep
breath to continue arguing and the thin dragon was winding up a long, involved
train of logical reasons why her proposal was the best, Kazul said, “Thank you
all for your advice. I’ll certainly think about it before I decide what to do.”
“What do you mean by that?” the thin dragon asked suspiciously.

“It was my princess who met the wizard,” Kazul pointed out. “Therefore, it is
my decision whether to report the matter to the King, or to take some action on
my own, or to ask for cooperation from some of you.”

None of the other dragons appeared to like hearing this, but to Cimorene’s
surprise none of them gave Kazul any argument about it. The dragon at the far
end of the table made a few half-hearted grumbles, but that was all, and the
conversation turned to the intricacies of several draconian romances that were
currently in progress. As soon as her guests appeared to have calmed down,
Kazul gave the signal for the empty mousse dishes to be taken away, so
Cimorene only heard a few incomprehensible snatches of the new conversation.
She did not really mind. She had plenty to think about already.


FOR the next three weeks, Cimorene spent most of her free time studying the
fireproofing spell and collecting the ingredients she would need to cast it. A few,
like the wolfsbane and feverfew, she could gather herself from the herbs that
grew on the slopes of the mountains. Alianora found a little jar of hippopotamus
oil among the cosmetics left by her predecessor. The unicorn water Cimorene
got from Morwen, after promising her a copy of the spell if it worked. She went
to Kazul about the white eagle feathers, though she was a little afraid to explain
what she wanted them for. She didn’t want Kazul to think that she was worried
about Kazul losing her temper and accidentally roasting her. Fortunately, the
dragon found the whole idea very interesting.

“It could be very useful,” Kazul said reflectively. “There are enough hot-
tempered youngsters around that it would be well worth fireproofing the
princesses who have to deal with them.”

“I’m not sure I’ll be able to fireproof anyone at all,” Cimorene said. “I still need
the white eagle feathers and the powdered hens’ teeth, and nobody seems to have
any.”

“I’ll see what I can do,” Kazul said, and a few days later she dropped a bundle of
white feathers at the door of the kitchen. Half a feather was stuck to one of her
right claws, and another was caught between two of her teeth, and she looked
very pleased with herself. Cimorene decided not to ask any awkward questions.
Even Kazul, however, could not find any hens’ teeth, so Cimorene had to keep
putting off trying out the spell.

When she wasn’t working on collecting the ingredients for the fireproofing spell,
Cimorene read the Historia Dracorum. It was very difficult at first. After all, it
had been a long time since her last Latin lesson. She kept working at it until she
started to remember the right endings for the declensions and conjugations and
cases. Shortly after that she realized that she was not having to look up quite as
many words as she had at the beginning.

From then on, her progress was rapid. It helped that she found the book
fascinating. Dragon history was not a subject commonly taught to princesses in
Linderwall. But as she was now a dragon’s princess, she had personal reasons to
be interested. Besides, the history of the dragons was very exciting. Every page
was full of descriptions of dragons ravaging villages, carrying off princesses,
defeating knights and princes (and occasionally being defeated by them), and
fighting with wizards, giants, and each other. When the book wasn’t describing
battles, it was describing famous dragons’ hoards and peculiar draconian
customs.

Cimorene was in the library with the Historic Dracorum in front of her and her
Latin dictionary on the table beside her left hand when she heard someone
calling from the front of the cave. She had hoped it would be at least a little
longer before the knights started coming back, so she couldn’t help sighing as
she stuck a leather bookmark in the book and closed it. Then she went out to
argue with whoever it was until they went away.

Two wizards were standing just outside the mouth of the cave. Cimorene saw
their wooden staffs first, before she was close enough to see their faces. As she
came nearer, she recognized the one on the left as Zemenar. The one on the right
was taller and younger; his brown hair and beard showed no trace of gray. His
blue and brown robes were identical to the older wizard’s, except for the colors.
His eyes were the same bright black as his companion’s, and he looked at
Cimorene in a way that made her feel uneasy.

“Good morning to you. Princess Cimorene,” Zemenar said. “I thought I would
take you up on your kind invitation to visit. I hope we haven’t come at an
inconvenient time?”

“Not at all,” Cimorene said, thinking hard. She had promised Kazul that she
would try to find out what Zemenar was after if he showed up, and here he was.
Maybe if she convinced him that she was as silly as her sisters, he would be
careless enough to let something slip.

“I thought perhaps we might have since it took you so long to come out,”
Zemenar said mildly, but Cimorene thought there was a hint of suspicion in his
eyes.

“I must not have heard you right away,” Cimorene said, batting her eyes
innocently, the way her next youngest sister did whenever she had done
something particularly foolish. “Kazul has quite a large set of caves, and I was in
one of the ones at the back. I’m so sorry.”

“Ah.” Zemenar stroked his beard with his left hand. “That would make it
difficult for you. Perhaps we could set up a spell for you, one that would let you
know whenever anyone comes to visit. It would be more pleasant for visitors,
too, if they didn’t have to shout. What do you think, Antorell?”

“Like the one at the headquarters of the society,” the second wizard said,
nodding. “We could do it in two or three minutes, right from here. It’d be easy.”

Zemenar shot a dark look at his companion. Cimorene was sure that he’d wanted
to pretend he was inventing a difficult new spell, so that he would have an
excuse to wander around Kazul’s caves. “Quite so,” said Zemenar. “Well,
Princess?”
“Oh, dear, I don’t know,” Cimorene said, doing her best to imitate the way her
eldest sister behaved whenever anyone wanted her to decide anything. “It sounds
very nice, but Kazul is so picky about where things go and how things are
done... . No, I couldn’t, I simply couldn’t let you do anything like that without
asking Kazul first.”

“What a pity,” Zemenar said. His companion coughed and shuffled his feet. “Ah,
yes. Allow me to present my son, Antorell. I hope you don’t mind my bringing
him along?”

“Of course not,” Cimorene said politely.

“I am pleased to make the acquaintance of such a lovely princess,” Antorell said,
bowing.

Cimorene blinked. This wasn’t getting anywhere. Maybe if she brought them
inside they’d relax a little. “Thank you,” she said to Antorell. “Won’t you come
in and have some tea?”

“We would be delighted,” Zemenar said quickly. “If you’ll lead the way.
Princess?”

“This way,” Cimorene said. She stopped just inside the mouth of the cave and
gave the wizards her sweetest and most innocent smile. “You can leave your
staffs right here. Just lean them up against the wall.”

Antorell looked considerably startled, and Zemenar frowned. “Is this, too,
something your dragon requires?” he said.

“I don’t know,” Cimorene said, wrinkling up her forehead the way her third-
from-eldest sister did whenever she was puzzled (which was often). “But they’ll
be so awkward in the kitchen. Don’t you think so? There’s not very much room.”

“We’ll manage,” Zemenar said.

Cimorene hadn’t really expected to get the wizards to let go of their staffs, but it
had been worth a try. She shrugged and smiled and led them on into the kitchen,
where she made a point of bumping into the staffs or tripping over them every
time she went by. Finally Antorell turned his sideways and stuck it under the
table. Zemenar hung onto his with a kind of grim, suspicious stubbornness that
made Cimorene wonder whether she was fooling him at all with her pretended
silliness.

The wizards made uncomfortable conversation about the weather and the size of
the kitchen for several minutes while Cimorene fixed the tea and poured it. “Are
the rest of Kazul’s caves this large?” Zemenar asked as Cimorene handed him
his teacup. She had given him the one with the broken handle, even though he
was a guest, because she didn’t trust him.

“Oh, yes,” Cimorene said. She was beginning to think she was never going to
find out anything. The two wizards seemed perfectly happy to sit at the kitchen
table and talk about nothing whatever for hours.

“Remarkable,” said Antorell in an admiring tone. “You know, we wizards don’t
often get to see the inside of a dragon’s cave.”

I’ll bet you don’t, thought Cimorene as she gave him a puzzled smile. “That’s
too bad,” she said aloud.

“Yes, it is,” Zemenar said. “Perhaps you’d be willing to show us around?”

Cimorene thought very rapidly. It was obvious that she wasn’t going to learn
anything if the wizards sat at the kitchen table and drank tea, so she decided to
take a chance. “Well,” she said in a doubtful tone, “I suppose it would be all
right as long as I don’t take you into the treasure rooms.”

“That’s fine,” Antorell said, a little too quickly.

“You won’t touch anything, will you?” Cimorene said as they stood up. “Kazul
is so particular about where things are kept ...”

“Of course not,” Zemenar said, smiling insincerely.

Cimorene smiled back and led the way out into the hall. She watched the
wizards carefully as she took them through the large main cave, the general
storage caverns, and the big cavern where Kazul visited with other dragons.
Zemenar made polite noises about the size and comfort of everything, but
neither he nor Antorell seemed very interested. “And this is the library,”
Cimorene said, throwing the door open.
“I am impressed,” Zemenar said, and Cimorene could tell that this time he meant
it. She stepped sideways, so that she could keep an eye on both of the wizards at
the same time.

“A remarkable collection,” Antorell commented. He began walking around the
room, admiring the bookshelves and scanning the titles of the books.

“What’s this?” Zemenar said, bending over the table. “The Historia Dracorum?
A surprising choice for light reading. Princess.” His eyes met Cimorene’s, and
they were hard and bright and suspicious.

“Oh, I’m not reading it,” Cimorene said hastily, opening her eyes very wide. “I
just thought it would make the library look nicer to have a book or two sitting
out on the table. More—more lived-in.”

Zemenar nodded, looking relieved and faintly contemptuous. “I think it works
very well. Princess,” he said. “Very well indeed.” Then he looked over at the
other side of the room and said sharply, “Antorell! What are you doing?”

Cimorene turned her head in time to see Antorell put out a hand and deliberately
tip several books off one of the shelves. “Stop that!” she said, forgetting to sound
silly.

“I’m very sorry. Princess,” Antorell said. “Will you help me put them back
where they belong?”

Cimorene had no choice but to go over and help him. It took several minutes to
get everything back in place because Antorell kept dropping things. Cimorene
got quite annoyed with him and finally did it all herself. As she started to turn
back to the center of the room, she caught a glimpse of Zemenar hastily dosing
the Historia Dracorum. Cimorene pretended not to notice, but she made a mental
note that he had been looking at something near the middle of the book.

“That was dreadfully careless of you,” Cimorene said, frowning at Antorell.

“Very clumsy,” Zemenar agreed.

“I don’t know what Kazul will say when she finds out about it,” Cimorene went
on. “Really, it is too bad of you. I did ask you not to touch anything, you know.”
“Yes, you did,” Zemenar said. “And I wouldn’t like to think that we had gotten
you in trouble. Perhaps it would be best if you didn’t mention to Kazul that we
were here at all.”

“I suppose I could do that,” Cimorene said in a doubtful tone.

“Of course you can,” Antorell said encouragingly. “And I’ll come back in a few
days, to make sure everything’s all right.”

“I think it’s time we were on our way,” Zemenar said, giving his son a dark look.
“Thank you for showing us around. Princess.”

Cimorene escorted them out of the cave and made sure they had left, then
hurried back to the library. She spent the next several hours poring over the
middle parts of the Historia Dracorum, trying to figure out what Zemenar had
been looking at. She was still there when Kazul arrived home and called for her.

“That wizard Zemenar finally came, and he brought his son along with him,”
Cimorene said as she came out of the library.

“I know,” said Kazul. Her voice sounded a little thick, as if she had a cold. “I
could smell them the minute I came in.”

“Is that why you sound so odd?” Cimorene asked. “You’re not going to sneeze,
are you?”

“I don’t think so,” Kazul replied. “Don’t worry about it. I’ll have plenty of time
to turn my head away.”

“I wish I could get hold of some hens’ teeth,” Cimorene said, frowning. “That
fireproofing spell—”

“Have you looked in the treasure rooms?” Kazul asked.

“No,” Cimorene replied, startled. She remembered seeing a number of jars and
bottles of various shapes and sizes when she had been organizing the treasure,
and none of them had been labeled. “I didn’t think of it and besides, it’s your
treasure.”

“You’re my princess, at least until someone rescues you or I decide otherwise,”
Kazul pointed out. “Go ahead and look, and if you find any hens’ teeth, use
them. Be careful when you’re checking the jars, though. There are one or two
with lead stoppers that shouldn’t be opened.”

“Lead stoppers,” Cimorene said. “I’ll remember.”

“Good. Now, what did those wizards want?”

“I’m not sure.” Cimorene explained everything that had happened, including
how she had seen Zemenar closing the history book as she turned and how the
two wizards had been perfectly willing to leave right after that. “But just before
they disappeared, Antorell said he might come back another time,” Cimorene
concluded. “So I don’t know whether they found what they were looking for or
not.”

“Do you know which part of the Historia Dracorum Zemenar was reading?”
Kazul asked.

“Somewhere in the middle, a little past my bookmark,” Cimorene replied. “I was
just looking at it when you came in. It’s the part about how the dragons came to
the Mountains of Morning and settled into the caves and chose a king.”

‘That’s the section where the Historia describes the Caves of Fire and Night,
isn’t it?” Kazul said.

Cimorene nodded. “There was a whole page about somebody finding a stone in
the caves so that the dragons could pick a king. It didn’t make much sense to
me.”

“Colin’s Stone,” Kazul said, nodding. “We’ve used it to choose our king ever
since the first time. When a king dies, all the dragons go to the Ford of
Whispering Snakes in the Enchanted Forest and take turns trying to move
Colin’s Stone from there to the Vanishing Mountain. The one that succeeds is the
next king.”

“What if there are two dragons strong enough to move it?” Cimorene asked
curiously.

“It’s not a matter of strength,” Kazul said. “Colin’s Stone isn’t much larger than
you are. Even a small dragon could carry that much weight twice around the
Enchanted Forest without any trouble at all. But Colin’s Stone has an aura, a
kind of vibration. When you carry it, you can feel it humming through your
claws, and the humming gets stronger the farther you go until your bones are
shaking. Most dragons have to drop it or be shaken to pieces, but there’s always
one who is ... suited to the stone. For that dragon, the stone’s humming is just a
pleasant buzz, so of course it’s easy to get it to the Vanishing Mountain.”

“You sound as if you’ve had experience,” Cimorene said.

“Of course,” Kazul responded matter-of-factly. “I was old enough to participate
in the tests when the last king died.” She smiled reminiscently. “I got farther than
anyone expected me to, though I wasn’t one of the top ten by any means.”

Cimorene tilted her head to one side, considering. “I think I’m glad you didn’t
win.”

“Oh? Why is that?” Kazul sounded amused.

“Because you wouldn’t have had any use for a princess if you were the Queen of
the Dragons, and if you hadn’t decided to take me on, that yellow-green dragon
Moranz would probably have eaten me,” Cimorene explained.

“You mean, if I were the King of the Dragons,” Kazul corrected her. “Queen of
the Dragons is a dull job.”

“But you’re a female!” Cimorene said. “If you’d carried Colin’s Stone from the
Ford of Whispering Snakes to the Vanishing Mountain, you’d have had to be a
queen, wouldn’t you?”

“No, of course not,” Kazul said. “Queen of the Dragons is a totally different job
from King, and it’s not one I’m particularly interested in. Most people aren’t. I
think the position’s been vacant since Oraun tore his wing and had to retire.”

“But King Tokoz is a male dragon!” Cimorene said, then frowned. “Isn’t he?”

“Yes, yes, but that has nothing to do with it,” Kazul said a little testily. “ ‘King’
is the name of the job. It doesn’t matter who holds it.”

Cimorene stopped and thought for a moment. “You mean that dragons don’t care
whether their king is male or female; the title is the same no matter who the ruler
is.”

“That’s right. We like to keep things simple.”

“Oh.” Cimorene decided to return to the original topic of conversation before the
dragon’s “simple” ideas confused her any further. “Why would the wizards be
interested in Colin’s Stone if it’s only used for picking out the kings of the
dragons?”

“I doubt that they are,” Kazul replied. “However, Colin’s Stone was found in the
Caves of Fire and Night, and wizards have always been interested in the caves.
But the dragons control most of them, and all the easy entrances are ours, so the
wizards have never been able to find out as much as they would like. The
Historia Dracorum is one of the few books that talks about the caves at all, and
there aren’t many copies. I’ll wager Zemenar would have stolen it outright if
he’d thought he could get away with it.”

“I thought the dragons let wizards into the Caves of Fire and Night,” Cimorene
objected. “Why would Zemenar be poking through history books looking for
information if he can just go and look at them whenever he wants to?”

“We don’t let wizards visit the caves whenever they want,” Kazul said. “If we
did, they’d be running in and out all the time, and nobody would be able to
breathe without sneezing. No, they’re limited to certain days and times, and if
they want to visit the Caves of Fire and Night otherwise, they have to use one of
the entrances we don’t control. Few of them try. The other ways of getting into
the caves are very dangerous, even for wizards.”

“Maybe they’re looking for an easier way in.”

“Mmm.” Kazul did not seem to be paying much attention. She thought for a
moment, then turned toward the cave mouth. “I’m going to go see Gaurim.
Roxim said a book had been stolen from her library, and I want to know which
one. I’ll be back in a few hours.”

“I think I’ll go look at the Historia Dracorum again while you’re gone,”
Cimorene said thoughtfully. “If there is something useful in it about the Caves of
Fire and Night, maybe I can find it, now that I know what I’m looking for.”

Cimorene spent the rest of the afternoon carefully translating the chapter that
talked about the caves. She was disappointed to find that there was very little
about the caves themselves, though what was there was interesting. The book
told how the dragons had discovered the back way into the caves and described
some of the things they had found in them—caverns full of blue and green fire,
pools of black liquid that would cast a cloud of darkness for twenty miles around
if you poured three drops on the ground, walls made of crystal that multiplied
every sound a thousandfold, rocks that spurted fire when they were broken. Most
of the rest of the chapter was about Colin’s Stone, and how it was taken out of
the caves by the first King of the Dragons.

Kazul returned just before dinner, and she and Cimorene compared notes.
Cimorene told Kazul what she had learned from the chapter on the Caves of Fire
and Night, and then Kazul explained what she had learned from Gaurim.

“The stolen book was The Kings of the Dragons, and the entire first section was
about Colin’s Stone and the Caves of Fire and Night,” Kazul said. “And only a
wizard could have gotten past the spells and safeguards Gaurim puts on her
library. I think that settles it. The wizards are definitely collecting information
about the Caves of Fire and Night.”

“Then why do they keep looking at books of dragon history?” Cimorene asked.
“It seems like a roundabout way of finding out whatever it is that they want to
know.”

“There isn’t any other way to do it,” Kazul said. “Nobody but dragons has ever
had much to do with the caves, and no one has written much about them except
in dragon histories. Even the wizards weren’t particularly interested in them until
a few years ago, except as a reliable route into the Enchanted Forest.”

“But from what I’ve been reading in the Historia Dracorum, the caves sound
fascinating,” Cimorene said. “You mean to say that no one has ever written
anything about the Caves of Fire and Night except dragons?”

“That’s—” Kazul stopped suddenly, and her eyes narrowed. “No, that’s not right.
There was a rather rumpled scholar who talked his way into the caves a century
or so back, and after he left he wrote an extremely dry book about what he found
there. I’d forgotten about him.”

“Do you have a copy?” Cimorene asked hopefully.
“No,” Kazul said. “But I don’t think the Society of Wizards does, either. There
weren’t very many of them printed, and a lot of those were lost in a flood a few
years later. Some hero or other shoved a giant into a lake to drown him. The silly
clunch didn’t realize that if he put something that big into a lake, the water
would have to go somewhere.”

“Well, that doesn’t do us much good,” Cimorene said. “It’s nice that the Society
of Wizards doesn’t have a copy of that book, but if we can’t get hold of one
either—”

“I didn’t say that,” Kazul said. “I don’t have a copy myself, but I know who
does.”

“Who?” Cimorene said impatiently.

“Morwen. I’m afraid you’re not going to be able to work on that fireproofing
spell of yours tomorrow. We’re going to take a trip to the Enchanted Forest
instead.”


The rest of the trip home was uneventful. Passing through the King’s Cave
seemed easier going in the opposite direction, and the impenetrable darkness
only descended once. As soon as they arrived, Kazul took the book Morwen had
lent them and curled herself around a rock just outside the mouth of the cave to
study it while Cimorene made dinner. She pored over the book all evening, and
Cimorene found it fascinating to watch the dragon delicately turning pages with
her claws. Early the next day Kazul went off to consult with Roxim.

Cimorene was rather stiff from all the dragon riding she had done the previous
day, so she decided not to do any more cleaning. Instead, she spent the morning
in Kazul’s treasure room, sorting through likely looking bottles and jars for those
that might possibly contain powdered hens’ teeth. Remembering Kazul’s advice,
she started by setting aside all the bottles she could find that had lead stoppers.
Since the light was not very good, she took the jars and bottles that looked as if
they might be worth investigating and piled them in her apron, so as to carry
them outside more easily.

She had nearly finished sorting when she heard a voice calling faintly in the
distance.

“Bother!” she said. “I did hope they’d leave me alone a little longer.”

She bundled the last five bottles into her apron without looking at them and, not
forgetting to lock the door behind her, hurried out through the maze to see who
was shouting for her this time.
It was Therandil.

“What are you doing here?” Cimorene said crossly. “I told you I wasn’t going to
be ready to be rescued for at least a month!”

“I was worried,” Therandil said. “I heard that you’d broken a leg, but you look
fine to me.”

“Of course I haven’t broken a leg,” Cimorene said. “Where did you get that
idea?”

“Some knight at the inn at the foot of the mountain,” Therandil replied. “He was
up yesterday, talking to the princess he’s trying to rescue, and he came back and
warned everybody not to bother with the princess that was captured by the
dragon Kazul. Well, I knew that was you, so I asked why, and he said his
princess told him you’d broken your leg and wouldn’t be able to walk for
months.”

Cimorene smiled slightly. Alianora had apparently gone through with her plan to
tell Hallanna about Cimorene’s “twisted ankle,” and Hallanna had decided to
improve the story a little in hopes of reducing the competition. “Somebody must
have gotten mixed up,” Cimorene said gently. “You can stop worrying. I’m fine.
Is that all you came for? These jars are getting heavy, and I’ve got work to do.”

“Cimorene, we have to talk,” Therandil said in a heavy, deep voice.

“Then we’ll have to do it while I work,” Cimorene declared. She turned on her
heel and marched into the kitchen, full of annoyance. She had been feeling
almost friendly toward Therandil—he had been worried about her, after all—
until he said he wanted to talk. Cimorene was quite sure that what he wanted to
talk about was rescuing her, and she was annoyed with him for being so stupidly
stubborn and annoyed with herself for being annoyed when he was only trying to
do the best he could.

Therandil followed her into the kitchen. “What is all that?” he asked as
Cimorene put the apron full of jars on the kitchen table and began lining them
up.

“Some things I’m checking for Kazul,” Cimorene said. She picked up a small jar
made of carved jade and pried the lid off. It was half full of green salve.
Cimorene put the lid back on and set the jar aside.

“What was it you wanted to talk about?” she asked, reaching for another jar.

“You. Dragons. Us. That looks interesting. Can I help?”

“As long as you don’t break anything,” Cimorene said. “Some of these are very
fragile.” Maybe opening jars would make him forget about You. Dragons. Us,
for a while.

“I’ll be very careful,” Therandil assured her. “This one looks like metal. I’ll start
with that, shall I?” He picked up one of the larger jars, made of beaten copper
with two handles. He frowned at the top, then reached for his dagger, and as he
tilted the jar, Cimorene saw that the neck was stopped up with lead.

“Not that one!” she said quickly. She didn’t remember picking out that particular
jar. It must have been one of the last four or five that she’d scooped up when she
heard Therandil calling.

“Why not?” Therandil said, sounding rather hurt. “I said I’d be careful.” The tip
of his dagger was already embedded in the lead.

“Kazul said to leave the ones with lead stoppers alone,” Cimorene said. “So put
it back.”

“If you insist,” Therandil said, shrugging. He pulled on his dagger, but it was
stuck fast in the lead. “Drat!” he said, and twisted the handle. The dagger came
free, and the lead stopper came along with it.

“I should have known,” Cimorene said in a resigned tone.

A black cloud of smoke poured out of the jar. As Cimorene and Therandil
watched, it condensed into a dark-skinned giant wearing only a turban and a
loincloth. He was more than twice as tall as Therandil, and the corners of his
mouth were turned down in a stern frown.

“What is it?” whispered Therandil.

“Trouble,” said Cimorene.
“Thou speakest truly, 0 Daughter of Wisdom,” said the giant in a booming voice
that filled the cave. “For I am a jinn, who was imprisoned in that jar, and I am
the instrument of thy death and that of thy paramour.”

“My what?” Cimorene said, outraged.

“Thy lover,” the jinn said uncomfortably. “The man who stands beside thee.”

“I know what you meant,” Cimorene said. “But he isn’t my lover, or my fiance,
or my boyfriend or anything, and I refuse to be killed with him.”

“But Cimorene, you know perfectly well—” Therandil started.

“You hush,” Cimorene said. “You’ve made enough of a mess already.”

“If he is not thy paramour, nor any of those other things, then what is he?” the
jinn asked suspiciously.

“A nuisance,” Cimorene said succinctly.

“Cimorene, you’re not being very kind,” Therandil said.

“What he is matters not,” the jinn said grandly after a moment’s heavy thought.
“It is enough that thou and he shall die.”

“Enough for whom?” Cimorene said.

The jinn blinked at her. “For me. ‘Tis my will that thou and he shall die by my
hand. Thou hast but to choose the manner of thy death.”

“Old age,” Cimorene said promptly.

“Mock me not! Thou and he shall die, and by my hand, ere this day draws to its
close!” the jinn cried.

“Do you suppose he means it?” Therandil said nervously.

“Why would he keep bellowing it at us if he didn’t mean it?” Cimorene said.
“Do be quiet, Therandil.”

Therandil lowered his voice. “Should I offer to fight him, do you think?”
“Don’t be silly,” Cimorene said. She saw that Therandil was distressed, so she
added, “You came up here to fight a dragon. You aren’t prepared for a jinn, and
nobody could reasonably expect you to challenge him.”

“If you say so,” Therandil said, looking relieved.

Cimorene turned back to the jinn and saw that he, too, was looking perturbed.
“What’s the matter with you?” she said crossly.

“Dost thou not wish to know why I will kill thee?” the jinn asked plaintively.

“What difference does it make?” Cimorene said.

“Yes, actually,” Therandil said at the same time.

“Therandil!” Cimorene said in exasperation. “Shut up!”

“Hear my story, 0 luckless pair!” the jinn said with evident relief. “I am one of
those jinn who did rebel against the law of our kind, and for my crimes I was
sentenced to imprisonment in this bottle until the day should come when human
hands would loose me. As is the custom of my people, I swore that whoso
should release me during the first hundred years of my imprisonment I would
make ruler of the earth; whoso should release me during the second hundred
years I should make rich beyond all dreams of men; whoso shall release me
during the third hundred I should grant three wishes; and whoso should release
me after any longer span of time I should grant only the choice of what death he
would die.”

“You’re going to kill us because it’s traditional?” Cimorene asked.

“Yes,” the jinn said. His eyes slid away from Cimorene’s, and she frowned
suddenly.

“Just how long were you in that jar?” she demanded.

“Uh, well, actually .. .” The jinn’s voice trailed off.

“How long?” Cimorene insisted.

“Two hundred and seventeen years,” the jinn admitted. “But nobody ever
releases a jinn before the three hundred years are over.”

“You’re trying to get around your oath!” Therandil said, plainly shocked by the
very thought. “You pretended you had to kill us so you wouldn’t have to give us
the wishes!”

“No!” the jinn said. “Thinkest thou that the granting of wishes alone would so
trouble me? Needs must I kill thee and thy fair companion, for I cannot return
home and say that thou didst release me and I left thee living! I would be a
laughingstock. Never in three thousand years has such a thing occurred!”

“Then you shouldn’t have sworn an oath,” Therandil said sternly.

“I had to!” the jinn said miserably. “It is the custom of our kind. Twould be ...
‘twould be ...”

“Improper?” Cimorene murmured.

“ Twould be improper to do otherwise,” the jinn said, nodding. “But now thou
hast found me out, and what am I to do? If I kill thee, it will violate my oath; if I
kill thee not, the remainder of my life will be a torment.”

“You could go back in the jar for another eighty-three years,” Cimorene
suggested delicately.

“I could ... go back?” The jinn blinked at her for a moment. “I could go back. I
could go back!”

“And in eighty-three years we’ll both be dead of old age,” Cimorene said. “Since
that was my choice of death, your oath will be fulfilled and you can go straight
home without killing anyone else or giving men any riches or power or
anything.”

‘Truly, thou art a jewel among women and the very Queen of Wisdom’s
daughters!” the jinn said happily. “Thou hast found the perfect solution to my
difficulties!”

“Wait a minute!” Therandil said. “What about those wishes?”

“Therandil!” Cimorene said in a shocked tone. “I’m surprised at you! How can
he give us wishes if he’s going back in the jar for eighty-three years? It wouldn’t
be right at all.”

Therandil frowned. “Are you sure? After all, we did let him out during his third
hundred years.”

“I suppose I could let thee have one wish at least, in token of my thanks for thy
help,” the jinn said. “As long as thou dost not tell anyone.”

“I wouldn’t dream of it,” Therandil assured him. “And my wish is to defeat a
dragon and win his princess’s hand in marriage!”

The jinn waved a dark hand over Therandil’s head. “There! When next thou dost
fight a dragon, thou shalt surely defeat him. And thou?” he said, turning to
Cimorene.

“I could use some powdered hens’ teeth,” Cimorene said.

The jinn blinked in surprise, but he waved his hand again, his face a mask of
concentration. Then he bowed and handed Cimorene a fat brown jar. “There’s
thy desire. Farewell!” With an elaborate salaam, the jinn dissolved back into a
cloud of smoke that poured back into the copper jar from which it had come.
Cimorene leaned over and plucked the lead stopper from the end of Therandil’s
knife. She jammed it back into place and heaved a sigh of relief.

Therandil was not paying attention. “What did you want something like that
for?” he asked, looking at the jar of hens’ teeth and wrinkling his nose in
distaste.

“I don’t believe I shall tell you,” Cimorene said, putting the jar carefully into one
of her apron pockets. “It has nothing to do with you.”

“Nothing to do with me? I like that!” Therandil said indignantly. “I’m going to
marry you, just as soon as I beat that dragon of yours.”

“I don’t think you’re going to beat Kazul,” Cimorene said in a considering tone.

“But that jinn just said—”

“He said that if you fight a dragon, you’ll defeat him. But Kazul is a her, not a
him,” Cimorene pointed out. “And you ought not to be trying to rescue me
anyway.”

“Why not?” Therandil asked truculently.

“Because there are other princesses who’ve been captives of dragons for much
longer than I have, and they have seniority,” Cimorene explained.

“Oh,” said Therandil, looking considerably taken aback. “How do you know?”

“They came to visit and told me all about it,” Cimorene said. “I think you should
try for Keredwel. She’s from the Kingdom of Raxwel, and her hair is the color of
sun-ripened wheat, and she wears a gold crown set with diamonds. You ought to
get along with her very well.”

Therandil brightened perceptibly at this description but said, “But everyone
expects me to rescue you.”

“As long as you defeat a dragon and rescue a princess, no one will care,”
Cimorene said firmly. “And Keredwel will suit you much better than I would.”

“Are you sure her dragon isn’t female, too?”

“Positive,” Cimorene said. “Gomul’s cave is two down and three over. If you
follow the path outside, you can’t miss it. He ought to be there now, and if you
leave right away, you’ll be able to get everything settled before dinner.”

“All right, then,” Therandil said. “As long as you’re sure you don’t mind.”

“Not at all,” Cimorene assured him fervently. She saw him to the mouth of the
cave and pointed him toward Gomul’s cave, then returned to the kitchen. She
gathered up the jars and bottles she had been planning to check, except for the
copper jar with the jinn inside, and took them back to the treasure vault.

Then she fetched an ink pot, a quill pen, and a sheet of paper from the library
and began writing out a warning to attach to the copper jar. She didn’t want
anyone else to open it until the eighty-three years were over and the jinn could
go home without killing anyone.

She was just finishing when she heard Alianora’s voice calling from the rear of
the cave. “I’m in the kitchen!” she shouted. “Come on back!”

“You’re always in the kitchen,” Ahanora said when she poked her head through
the door a moment later. “Or the library. Don’t you ever do anything but cook
and read?”

“Look at this, Alianora,” Cimorene said, handing her the warning she had been
writing. “Do you think it’s dear enough?”

“ ‘WARNING: This jar contains a jinn who will kill you if you let him out too
soon. Do not open until at least one hundred and five years after the date when
the Citadel of the Yellow Giant was destroyed,’ “ Alianora read aloud. “That’s,
let's see, eighty-four years from now. It seems clear to me. You’d have to be
pretty stupid to ignore a warning like that.”

“Maybe I ought to show it to Hallanna and see what she says,” Cimorene said,
frowning. “I wouldn’t want anyone getting into trouble by accident, just because
I didn’t make it plain.”

“It’s plain, it’s plain,” Alianora said. “Cimorene, what on earth have you been
doing? How do you know there’s a jinn in this bottle?”

“Therandil,” Cimorene said, waving a hand expressively. “I was looking through
some of the bottles from Kazul’s treasure room, to see if any of them happened
to have hens’ teeth in them, and Therandil came in and wanted to help.”

“And he opened it?” Alianora said. “Oh, dear.”

“Exactly,” said Cimorene. “But it came out well in the end. I think I’ve gotten
rid of him for good. I sent him off to rescue Keredwel.”

“You did? What if he doesn’t beat Gomul?”

“Oh, he’ll win. The jinn gave him a wish, and he wished to defeat a dragon.”
Cimorene looked apologetically at Alianora. “I suppose I ought to have sent him
to rescue you, but ...”

“That’s quite all right,” Alianora said hastily. “Getting rid of Keredwel will help
a lot. And after everything you’ve told me about Therandil, I don’t think I’d
want to have him rescue me.”
“That's what I thought,” Cimorene said. “Oh, and I got the jinn to give me some
powdered hens’ teeth, so we can finally try that fireproofing spell.”

“Good,” Alianora said. “Let’s do it right now!”

So Cimorene got out the spell and the ingredients she had collected, and she and
Alianora spent the next hour on various necessary preparations. First they had to
boil some unicorn water and steep the dried wolfsbane in it. Then the mixture
had to be strained and mixed with the hippopotamus oil and the powdered hens’
teeth. Cimorene did most of that, while Alianora ground up the blue rose leaves
and the piece of ebony.

Grinding the ebony took a long time, but fortunately they didn’t need much.
When Alianora finally had enough, Cimorene mixed it with the blue rose leaves
and more of the unicorn water in one of Kazul’s recently shed scales. Each
mixture had to be stirred three times counterclockwise with a white eagle
feather. Then Alianora dipped the point of her feather in her mixture and began
drawing a star on the floor of the cave.

“Is this going to be big enough for both of us?” she asked, scratching busily at
the stone with the tip of the feather.

“I think so,” Cimorene answered. “Don’t try to make it too big, or you’ll run out
of liquid and we’ll have to start over.”

Alianora did not run out, though she had used nearly all her mixture by the time
she finished. “There!” she said. She sat back on her heels and studied her
diagram to make sure there were no gaps, then set her dragon scale and feather
aside and stood up. “Your turn.”

“First we have to get into the center of the star,” Cimorene reminded her. “Be
careful not to smudge the lines!”

“Smudge them, after all that work?” Alianora said in tones of mock horror. She
lifted her skirts and stepped carefully into the middle of the diagram. Cimorene
followed, carrying a small mixing bowl half full of something that looked like
brown sludge with a white eagle feather sticking out of one side. “It smells
awful,” Alianora said, grimacing.

“It doesn’t matter what it smells like, as long as the spell works,” Cimorene said.
“Ready?”

“As ready as I’m ever going to be,” Alianora re plied, shutting her eyes and
screwing up her face as if she expected to have a glass of cold water poured over
her head.

Cimorene plucked the eagle feather out of the bowl and raised it quickly over
Alianora’s head before it could drip on the floor. She let four large drops of the
brown gunk fall onto Alianora’s hair, then brushed the end of the feather across
her forehead twice. She finished by drawing a circle with the feather on the palm
of Alianora’s left hand.

“That tickles!” Alianora complained.

“Well, you can do it to me now,” Cimorene said. Alianora took the bowl and
feather from Cimorene. “You’re right,” Cimorene said a moment later. “It does
tickle.”

“Now what?” Alianora said.

“Set the bowl down and shut your eyes,” Cimorene instructed. When Alianora
had done so, Cimorene closed her own eyes and said:

“Power of water, wind and earth,

Turn the fire back to its birth.

Raise the spell to shield the flame

By the power that we have tamed.”

“Oh!” said Alianora. “That feels peculiar. Can I open my eyes now?”

“Yes,” said Cimorene, opening her own. “We’re finished.”

“Did it work?” Alianora asked, cautiously opening one eye and squinting at
Cimorene.

“Well, something happened. We both felt it,” Cimorene said. “And your hair and
forehead don’t have brown gunk on them any more.”
Alianora promptly opened both eyes and studied Cimorene. “Neither do yours.
What does that mean?”

“It means we go back to the kitchen and test it,” Cimorene said. She bent over
and picked up the mixing bowl. “We’ll clean up later. Come on.”

Alianora decided to return home by way of the path outside instead of through
the tunnels because it was such a nice day and she hoped the sun would dry her
skirt. Cimorene watched her go, swinging her basket happily and humming a
little, her confidence and good humor completely restored by the possession of
the fat little packet of dried feverfew in her pocket.

“I wish I had as little to worry about,” Cimorene muttered, thinking of Woraug
and the wizards. She held the burned patch at the end of her sleeve up to get a
better look at it in the sunlight and shook her head. Even the magic wardrobe
would have a hard time fixing that. A puff of wind made her shiver in her wet
clothes, and she turned to go back into the cave to change.

A dark shadow fell over Cimorene, and she stopped and looked up. “Kazul!” she
said as the dragon landed on the open path beside her. “Am I glad to see you.
Wait until you hear what’s been happening!”

“You do appear to have had a rather strenuous day,” Kazul said, eyeing
Cimorene’s wet, stained skirt and the blackened end of her right sleeve.
“Nothing serious, I trust?”

“I’m not sure,” Cimorene said. “Alianora and I went out to pick some feverfew,
and we ran into that wizard Antorell.”

“Where was this?”

Cimorene pointed. “Up that way. There’s a little round valley off to one side that
looks as if dragons never go there, and—”

“You found a wizard there?” Kazul sounded deeply disturbed. “How did he get
in? How did you get in?”

“We climbed through a crack in a boulder,” Cimorene said. “I don’t know how
Antorell did it. When he left, he was heading for the far side of the valley.”

“This is serious,” Kazul said, getting to her feet “I’d better warn the King. He’ll
have to use the crystal now.”

“You’d better hear the rest of it first,” Cimorene said. “Antorell wasn’t too happy
to see us, but when he found out that Alianora was Woraug’s princess, he
relaxed. He seemed to think that Woraug had sent us.”

“What?”

Cimorene involuntarily stepped back a pace at the anger in Kazul’s voice. “He
thought Woraug had sent us,” she repeated, and gave a quick summary of her
conversation with Antorell.

“Woraug!” Kazul’s tail lashed, sweeping a small boulder from one side of the
path to the other. “But Woraug’s not a fool, and only a fool would let a wizard
into that valley. Unless he was sure that they didn’t know ... What was Antorell
doing?”

“Cutting plants,” Cimorene said. “Or rather, cutting a plant. It didn’t look as if he
took more than one.”

“He wouldn’t need more than one, if it was the right one,” Kazul said tensely.
“What did he pick?”

“It was a prickly looking purple thing, with sawedged leaves,” Cimorene said,
reaching into her pocket. “I didn’t recognize it, but I thought you might, so I
brought a piece back for you to look—”

“What?” Kazul roared.

Flame spurted from the dragon’s mouth, enveloping Cimorene. Steam hissed
from her wet skirt, and the thinner material of her sleeves vanished in a crackle
of sparks. The handkerchief-wrapped spray of purple leaves, which she had just
taken out of her pocket to show Kazul, disintegrated into a dark, greasy-looking
cloud of smoke.

Cimorene stared at the ashes in her palm, feeling very, very glad that she had
decided to test the way fresh feverfew would work in the fireproofing spell. She
felt a little warm, and her clothes had been reduced to a few charred rags, but
that was nothing compared to what might have happened.

“Now I understand why Alianora ran out of feverfew,” she muttered.

A puff of wind brushed Cimorene’s arms, and she heard a choking sound from
Kazul. She looked up, expecting to find the dragon laughing at her remark, and
her eyes widened. Kazul’s head was thrown back, and her mouth was wide open,
giving Cimorene an excellent view of the dragon’s sharp silver teeth and long
red tongue. Cimorene skipped backward out of reach; then she realized that the
dragon was gasping for air.

“Kazul! What’s the matter?”

“The smoke!” Kazul coughed. Her voice was so hoarse that it was hard for
Cimorene to understand what she was saving.

“What can I do?” Cimorene said, trying not to feel frightened.

“Green jar—shelf in last treasure room,” Kazul managed between coughs.
“Hurry.”

Cimorene was already running through the mouth of the cave as fast as her feet
could carry her. She did not even pause as she snatched up her lamp from the
floor just inside the door. It seemed to take forever to get through the twisty
passages and the first two caves full of treasure. She skidded to a halt in the
doorway of the third room and stood panting, scanning the walls for the shelf
and the right jar. She found it quickly and ran back at once, the jar clutched
tightly in her right hand.

The sound of Kazul’s coughing grew louder as Cimorene sped back the way she
had come. At the mouth of the cave, Cimorene paused and set down the lamp,
then unscrewed the top of the green jar. Inside was a thick, emerald-colored
liquid about the consistency of honey. She looked out at Kazul. The dragon’s
head jerked with each cough, and the scales on her neck were beginning to turn
pink around the edges. For a long, careful moment Cimorene studied Kazul’s
movements. Then she leaned back and threw the emerald liquid, jar and all, into
the dragon’s open mouth just as Kazul took another gasping breath.

The jar landed on Kazul’s tongue. The dragon’s mouth dosed, and she swallowed
convulsively. Sudden silence descended.

“Are you all right now?” Cimorene asked after Kazul had taken several deep
breaths without a renewed bout of coughing.

“I will be,” Kazul said. She sounded exhausted, and her movements as she slid
into the cave were slow and uncertain.

“What happened?” Cimorene said, backing out of the way so that Kazul would
not have to exert herself to go around.

“I got a breath of the smoke when the plant in your hand burned,” Kazul said as
she settled to the floor just inside the entrance. “Lucky it was only a breath. I’ll
need a few days of rest, but that’s better than being dead.”

Cimorene stared at her, appalled. “What was that plant?”

“Dragonsbane,” said Kazul. Her eyes closed and she slept.

Kazul continued to sleep for most of the next three days. She woke only long
enough for Cimorene to pour a couple of gallons of warm milk mixed with
honey down her throat from time to time before she lapsed back into
unconsciousness. Cimorene was very worried, but there wasn’t much that she
could do. Sick dragons are too large and heavy for normal nursing to be of much
use.

On the afternoon of the third day, Kazul woke up completely for the first time
since her collapse.

“Thank goodness!” said Cimorene as Kazul shook her head experimentally and
sat up. “I was beginning to think you were going to sleep for a month.”

“I might have if I’d gotten more than a whiff of that smoke.” Kazul stretched her
neck in one direction and her tail in the other, trying to work out some of the
kinks.

“If I’d known it was so dangerous, I’d never have brought any of that purple
plant back with me,” Cimorene apologized. “You might have done worse than
sleep for a month. You might have—” She stopped, unwilling to complete the
thought.

“I might have died?” Kazul said. “Unlikely. If a dragon isn’t killed outright by
something in the first five minutes, recovery is only a matter of time. That
applies as much to dragonsbane as to a knight’s magic sword.”

“Then why did you want that goo in the green jar?” Cimorene asked.

“The antidote? I wanted it because I didn’t like the idea of spending a month
recuperating when I didn’t have to. And since—” A fit of coughing interrupted
Kazul in mid-sentence.

Cimorene skipped backward out of the way. Frowning worriedly, she tossed a
pinch of feverfew into the air and recited the verse from the fireproofing spell in
case Kazul should lose control of her flame again. “Maybe you won’t need a
month to recover, but three days obviously isn’t enough,” she said to the dragon.
“You’d better lie back down before you choke.”

“I can’t,” Kazul said. “I have to warn the King. If the wizards have had
dragonsbane for three days already—” She started coughing again and had to
stop talking.

“You stay here,” Cimorene said in a firm tone. “I’ll warn the King.”

“Tokoz won’t listen to you,” Kazul said, but she settled back to the ground.
“Roxim will, though. Start with him.”

“Roxim?” Cimorene said doubtfully. She was afraid the gray-green dragon
would want to go charging out after the wizards as soon as he heard they were
up to something.

“He’ll listen to you, and the King will listen to him,” Kazul said. “It’s not ideal,
but it’s the best we can do.”

“All right, I’ll go see Roxim. You stay here and sleep.”
“When you get back—”

“I’ll wake you and tell you what he said,” Cimorene promised. “Now, go to
sleep.”

Kazul smiled slightly and closed her eyes. Cimorene caught up a lamp and
almost ran to the exit at the back of the cave. She was afraid that Kazul would
think of something else and start talking again, and she didn’t think talking
would be good for her.

In the tunnel outside, Cimorene paused, trying to remember the directions to
Roxim’s cave. She had memorized a map in the library that showed most of the
twists and turns of the dragons’ tunnels, but she knew from experience that in the
miles of gray store corridors it was difficult to keep track of where she was.

“Left, left, fifth right, past the little chamber, right again, on past the iron gate,
two lefts to the third cave down,” she muttered to herself. “I wish Roxim’s cave
were closer.” Still muttering, she started off.

Though she was being very careful, Cimorene had to backtrack twice during the
first part of her trip when a mistake in counting corridors led her to a dead end.
When she finally saw the iron gate that led into the Caves of Fire and Night, she
sighed in relief. The tricky part was over, and the rest of the trip would be easy.
She held her lamp up and quickened her step, hoping to make up some of the
time she had lost on her detours. Then, as she reached the bars that blocked the
entrance to the Caves of Fire and Night, she stopped short. There was someone
sitting on the ground on the other side of the gate.

Cimorene had almost missed seeing him, and no wonder. His clothes, though
well cut, were the same dark gray as the stone of the tunnel walls, and he was
curled into a lumpy, dejected ball. He looked like a large rock. If he hadn’t
moved his hand as she passed, Cimorene would never have realized he was
alive.

The man on the other side of the bars raised his head, and Cimorene saw with
shock that his hair and skin were the same dark, even gray as his clothes. His
eves, too, were gray, and their expression was apologetic.

“Forgive me for startling you,” the man said, climbing ponderously to his feet. “I
didn’t see you coming.” He made a stiff, formal bow.
“Who are you?” Cimorene demanded. “And what are you doing in there?”

“I’m a prince,” the man said in a gloomy tone, “and I’m reaping the rewards of
my folly.”

“What folly?”

The prince sighed. “It’s a long story.”

“Somehow they always seem to be long,” Cimorene said. “You haven’t come to
rescue me from the dragons, have you? Because if you have, I’m not going to let
you out of there. I haven’t got time to spend an hour arguing today.”

“I have no interest whatever in dragons, I assure you,” the prince said earnestly.
“And if you would let me out, I’d be extremely grateful. Um, who are you, by
the way?”

“Cimorene, princess of the dragon Kazul,” Cimorene said. She studied the prince
for a moment and decided that he looked trustworthy. “All right, I’ll let you out.
Turn around and put your fingers in your ears.”

“What?” the prince said, looking considerably startled.

“It’s part of the spell to open the gate,” Cimorene said. She wasn’t about to let
him overhear the words Kazul had used to unlock the door, even if he did look
trustworthy.

The prince shrugged and did as she directed. Quickly, Cimorene recited:

“By night and flame and shining rock

Open thou thy hidden lock.

Alberolingam!”

For an instant nothing happened, and Cimorene was afraid she had not
remembered the charm correctly. Then the iron gate swung silently open. The
prince, whose back was to the gate, did not notice. Cimorene touched his
shoulder to get his attention, and her eyes widened.
“Oh!” she said as he turned. “You’re—you’re stone.”

“I know,” the prince said. “Ifs part of that long story I mentioned earlier. I
haven’t gotten used to it yet.” He stepped through the gate, and it closed
noiselessly behind him.

“I’m afraid I don’t have time to listen to stories just now,” Cimorene said
politely. “I have a rather urgent errand to run, so if you’ll excuse me—”

“Can’t I come with you?”

Cimorene stared at him. “Why do you want to do that?”

The stone prince looked down at his feet with an embarrassed expression. “Um,
well, actually, I’m lost. And you seem to know your way around down here.” He
glanced hopefully at Cimorene’s face, then sighed.

“I suppose I can just wander around some more. I’ll have to find a way out
eventually.”

“You’ll run into a dragon and get eaten.”

“I don’t think it will hurt stone,” the prince said. He sounded almost cheerful, as
if he had only just realized that being made of stone might have some
advantages.

“Maybe not, but you’re sure to give the dragon indigestion,” Cimorene said.
“Bother! I don’t have time for this!”

“I could wait here if you’re coming back this way,” the stone prince suggested.

Cimorene brightened, then frowned and shook her head. “No, one of the dragons
might need to get into the Caves of Fire and Night, or it might be the turn of
those dratted wizards. You can’t stay here.”

“Then—”

“I know! You can wait in the serving room, just off the banquet hall,” Cimorene
said. “It’s close, there’s plenty of room, and I know no one’s using it today
because I checked the schedule for Alianora yesterday. I can take a shortcut out
the back to get to Roxim’s without losing any more time. Come on.”

“I really appreciate this,” the stone prince said as they started off. “You don’t
know what it’s like, being lost in the dark in these caves.”

“How did it happen?” Cimorene asked.

The stone prince’s expression became gloomy once more. “It’s all that
soothsayer’s fault,” he said.

“Soothsayer?”

“My father didn’t think it was appropriate to invite fairies to a prince’s
christening, so he invited a soothsayer instead,” the prince replied. “The
soothsayer took one look at me and said that I would grow up to do a great
service for a king. I’ve been stuck with his blasted prophecy ever since.”

“It doesn’t sound so terrible to me,” Cimorene said.

“It wasn’t, at first,” the stone prince admitted. “I had special tutors in all sorts of
interesting things to prepare me for being of great service to a king. My father
even sent me to a special school for people who’re supposed to do special
things.”

“Did you do well?”

“I was the top of my class,” the stone prince said with a flash of pride. His face
fell again. “That’s part of the problem.”

“I don’t understand,” Cimorene said. “This way. And can you walk a little faster,
please? I’m in a hurry.”

“It’s been three years since I graduated, and everyone’s still waiting for me to do
something spectacular,” the stone prince said, lengthening his stride. “The rest of
my classmates are already making names for themselves. George started killing
dragons right away, and Art went straight home and pulled some sort of magic
sword out of a rock. Even the ones nobody expected to amount to much have
done something. All Jack wanted to do was go back to his mother’s farm and
raise beans, and he ended up stealing a magic harp and killing a giant and all
sorts of things. I’m the only one who hasn’t succeeded.”
“Why not?”

The stone prince sighed again. “I don’t know. At first it seemed as if I wouldn’t
have any trouble finding a king to serve. Every time there was a war, both kings
asked me to lead their armies, and every king for miles around who’d lost his
throne to a usurper sent a messenger to my father’s court. It should have been
simple. Only they were always so worried about whether I was going to side
with their enemies that it was easier not to pick anyone.”

“I see,” said Cimorene. Privately she thought that the stone prince had been
rather wishy-washy.

Some of her opinion must have crept into her tone because the stone prince
nodded glumly. “You’re right. It was a mistake. As long as I didn’t pick a king to
serve, all the messengers and ambassadors and envoys stayed, hoping to
persuade me. The inns around the castle were stuffed with them. It got to the
point where I couldn’t show my face without at least three of them pouncing on
me.

“Finally I couldn’t stand it any more, and I ran away. It was a relief at first, not
having everyone hovering over me waiting for me to do something great. But
after a while I started feeling uncomfortable. Then I realized that even if nobody
around me expected me to do anything special in the service of a king, I
expected me to do something.

“I was so flustered that I ran up to the next palace I saw and asked whether the
king needed any services done. It turned out that he was ill, and his doctors had
told him that the only thing that would cure him was a drink of the Water of
Healing from the Caves of Fire and Night. So I left to get it at once.”

“So that’s what you were doing!” Cimorene said.

The stone prince gave her another gloomy nod. “I should have known better.
That king had three sons, and the first two had already gone off to get the water
and failed. Anyone with sense would have seen that the youngest son was the
one who would succeed; it sticks out all over. But I was too eager to do my great
service and get it over with, and I didn’t stop and think.”

“What happened?”
“It took me a long time to find the Caves of Fire and Night, but once I did, it
wasn’t hard to find the Water of Healing. The chamber’s getting crowded. All
the princes who’ve tried to get the water and failed have been turned into slabs
of rock.”

“I know. I’ve seen them,” Cimorene said. “Watch out for your head; the ceiling
is low along here.”

“Then you know what it’s like, and you’ve seen the two dippers on the wall by
the spring.” The stone prince’s shoulder’s sagged. “I knew I should use the tin
one. It was one of the first things we learned at school. But I thought it wouldn’t
do any harm if I just looked at the gold one, so I took it off the wall. And as soon
as I touched it, I started to stiffen up.”

“Um,” said Cimorene. The stone prince was obviously well aware of how
foolishly he had behaved. She saw no reason to make him feel worse by pointing
it out to him again.

“So I stuck my arm in the spring,” the prince said.

“You stuck your arm—oh, I see! That was clever,” Cimorene said.

“Do you really think so?” the stone prince asked anxiously. “I thought that since
the water from the spring is going to turn all the slabs of stone back into princes
when someone finally succeeds in the quest, then the water ought to keep me
from turning into a slab of stone in the first place. Only it didn’t work the way I
expected,” he finished disconsolately.

“I can see that,” Cimorene said. “But at least you can still do things. It would be
much worse to have to lie there waiting for the right prince to come along and
break the spell.”

“I wouldn’t have had to lie there very long,” the stone prince said. “That king’s
youngest son is going to arrive any day now, I just know it. Anyway, if I were a
slab of stone, I wouldn’t know about it until it was all over and I’d been turned
back into a prince again.”

“How do you know?” Cimorene demanded. “Have you ever been a stone slab?”

The stone prince looked startled. “No, I haven’t. I never thought of that.”
“Well, start thinking now,” Cimorene said tartly. “Here’s the service room. Wait
here for me, and don’t go wandering off if I’m late getting back. I don’t know
how long this errand is going to take, and it would be very awkward for me if the
dragons found you roaming through their tunnels.”

“I’ll remember,” the stone prince promised. “But what do I do if someone comes
in?”

“Duck into the banquet area,” Cimorene said, showing him. “And if someone
comes in there, too, curl up in the corner and pretend you’re a rock.”

“All right,” the prince said doubtfully. Cimorene did not like leaving him, but
she was even less enthusiastic about taking him to see Roxim. Roxim probably
wouldn’t object to the prince himself, though Cimorene suspected that there
might have been some difficulty over his proposed theft of the Water of Healing.
But explaining everything to the gray-green dragon would take hours. Roxim
was nice, but he tended to take a simple view of things, and the prince’s situation
was anything but simple. So Cimorene gave the prince one more warning, just to
make sure he understood, and started off toward Roxim’s cave to finish her
errand.