
EARLY ON THE MORNING of December 21, 1992, I was the picture of
contentment on the sun porch of our house on 5th Street in Washington,
D.C. The small, narrow room was cluttered with mildewing winter coats,
work boots, and wounded children's toys. I couldn't have cared less.
This was home.

I was playing Gershwin on our slightly out-of-tune, formerly grand
piano.    It was just past 5 A.M., and cold as a meat locker on the
porch.    I was prepared to sacrifice a little for "An American in
Paris."

The phone jangled in the kitchen.      Maybe I'd won the D.C., or
Virginia, or Maryland lottery and they'd forgotten to call the night
before.     I play all three games of misfortune regularly.

' Nana?     Can you get that?"      I called from the porch.

'It's for you. You might as well get it yourself," my testy
grandmother called back.    "No sense me gettin' up, too.        No
sense means nonsense in my dictionary."

That's not exactly what was said, but it went some thing like that. It
always does.

I hobbled into the kitchen, sidestepping more toys on morning-stiff
legs.   I was thirty-eight at the time.    As the saying goes, if
I'd known I was going to live that long, I would have taken better care
of myself. The call turned out to be from my partner in crime, John
Sampson.       Sampson knew I'd be up.       Sampson knows me better than
my own kids.

"Mornin', brown sugar.     You up, aren't you?"    he said.    No
other I.D.    was necessary.     Sampson and I have been best friends
since we were nine years old and took up shoplifting at Park's Corner
Variety store near the projects.   At the time, we had no idea that
old Park would have shot us dead over a pilfered pack of Chesterfields.
Nana Mama would have done even worse to us if she'd known about our
crime spree.

"If I wasn't up, I am now, " I said into the phone receiver.   "Tell
me something good."
"There's been another murder.       Looks like our boy again," Sampson
said.    "They're waitin' on us.    Half the free world's there
already.

"It's too early in the morning to see the meat wagon," I muttered. I
could feel my stomach rolling. This wasn't the way I wanted the day to
start.     "Shit. Fuck me.

Nana Mama looked up from her steaming tea and runny eggs.          She shot
me one of her sanctimonious, lady-of-the-house looks.      She was
already dressed for school, where she still does volunteer work at
seventy-nine.     Sampson continued to give me gory details about the
day's first homicides.

"Watch your language, Alex," Nana said.        "Please watch your language
so long as you're planning to live in this house."

"I'll be there in about ten minutes," I told Sampson. "I own this
house," I said to Nana. She groaned as if she were hearing that terrible
news for the first time.

"There's been another bad murder over in Langley Terrace.        It looks
like that killer. I'm afraid that it is," I told her.

"That's too bad," Nana Mama said to me.         Her soft brown eyes grabbed
mine and held.       Her white hair looked like one of the doilies she
puts on all our livingroom chairs.     "That's such a bad part of what
the politicians have let become a deplorable city.      Sometimes I
think we ought to move out of Washington, Alex."

"Sometimes I think the same thing," I said, "but we'll probably tough it
out."

"Yes, black people always do.       We -persevere.     We always suffer
in silence."

"Not always in silence," I said to her.

I had already decided to wear my old Harris Tweed jacket.     It was a
murder day, and that meant I'd be seeing white people.     Over the
sport coat, I put on my Georgetown warm-up jacket.     It goes better
with the neighborhood.

On the bureau, by the bed, was a picture of Maria Cross.     Three
years before, my wife had been murdered in a drive-by shooting. That
murder, like the majority of murders in Southeast, had never been
solved.

I kissed my grandmother on the way out the kitchen door.       We've done
that since I was eight years old.

so say good-bye, just in case we never see each other n.        It's been
like that for almost thirty years, ever since Nana Mama first took me in
and decided she could make something of me.

She made a homicide detective, with a doctorate in psychology, who works
and lives in the ghettos of Washington, D.C.



THE PRIVATE-SCHOOL SURROUNDINGS were a little

intimidating for Sampson and me.        This was a long,

long way from the schools and people of South east.


We were two of only a few blacks inside the Washington Day School lobby.
I'd heard there were supposed to be African kids, the children of
diplomats, at the private school, but I didn't see any.    Just
clusters of shocked teachers, children, parents, police.      People
were crying openly on the front lawns and inside the school's lobby. Two
little kids, two little babies had been kidnapped from one of
Washington's most prestigious private schools.        I understood that it
was a sad, tragic day for everybody involved.       Leave it at that, I
told myself.       Just do your job.

We went about our police business.     We tried to suppress the fury we
were feeling, but it wasn't easy. I kept

seeing the sad eyes of little Mustaf Sanders.   A uniform told us we
were wanted in the headmaster's office.     Chief of Detectives Pittman
was there waiting for us.

"Be cool," Sampson advised.        "Live to fight another day.    91

George Pittman usually wears a gray or blue business suit on the job. He
favors pin-striped dress shirts and striped silver-and-blue neckties.
He's a Johnson & Murphy shoe and belt man.             His gray hair is always
slicked back so it fits his bullet head like a tight helmet.    He is
known as The Jefe, the Boss of Bosses, 11 Duce, Thee Pits, Georgie
Porgie .  .   .

I think I know when my trouble with Chief of Detectives Pittman began.
It was after the Washington Post ran that story on me in the Sunday
magazine section. The piece detailed how I was a psychologist, but
working Homicide and Major Crimes -in D.C.       I had told the reporter
why I continued to live in Southeast.   "It makes me feel good to
live where I live.   Nobody's going to drive me out of my own house."

Actually, I think it was the title chosen for the article that pushed
Chief Pittman (and some others in the department) over the edge. The
young journalist had interviewed my grandmother while researching the
piece.     Nana had been an English teacher, and the impressionable
writer ate that up.     Nana had proceeded to fill his head with her
notion that because black people are basically traditionalists, they
would logically be the very last people in the South to give up
religion, morals, and even formal manners.         She said that I was a
true Southern man, having been born in North Carolina.            She also
questioned why it was that we idolize near-psychotic detectives in
films, TV, books, and newspaper articles.

The title of the piece, which ran over my brooding photograph, was "The
Last Southern Gentleman.         " The story caused big problems inside our
very uptight department.       Chief Pittman especially took offense. I
couldn't prove it, but I believed the story had been placed by someone
in the mayor's office.

I gave a one-two-three rap on the door of the headmaster's office and
Sampson and I walked in.       Before I could say a word, Pittman held up
his right hand. "Cross, you just listen to what I have to say," he said
as he came over to us.     "There's been a kidnapping at this school.
It's a major kidnapping-"

"That's a real bad thing," I butted in immediately. "Unfortunately, a
killer has also struck the Condon Terrace and Langley neighborhoods. The
killer's hit two times already.   Six people are dead so far. Sampson
and I are the senior people on that case.     Basically, we're it. "

"I'm apprised of the situation in the Condon and Langley projects. I've
already made contingencies.        It's taken care of," Pittman said.

"Two black women had their breasts sliced off this morning.     Their
pubic hair was shaved while they were tied up in bed.      Were you
apprised of that?"     I asked him. "A three-year-old boy was murdered,
in his pajamas.    " I was shouting again.     I glanced at Sampson
and saw him shaking his head.

A group of teachers in the office looked our way.

"Two young black women had their breasts sliced off, I repeated for
their benefit.   "Someone's wandering around D.C.       this morning
with breasts in his pocket."

Chief Pittman gestured toward the headmaster's inner office.   He
wanted the two of us inside the room.  I shook my head.      I
wanted to have witnesses when I was around him.

"I know what you're thinking, Cross."     He lowered his voice and
spoke very close to my face.     The odor of stale cigarettes billowed
out at me.    "You think I'm out to get you, but I'm not.    I know
you're a good cop.     I know your heart's usually in the right place."

"No, you don't know what I'm thinking.     Here's what I'm thinking!
Six black people are dead already.      A crazed, homicidal killer is
out there.    He's in heat.    He's sharpening his eyeteeth. Now two
white kids have been kidnapped, and that's a horrible thing. Horrible!
But I'm already on a fucking case!" Pittman suddenly jabbed his index
finger at me.    His face was very red.     "I decide what cases
you're on! I decide!    You're experienced as a hostage negotiator.
You're a psychologist.     We have other people to send into Langley
and Condon.       Besides, Mayor Monroe has specifically asked for you."

So that was it.     Now I understood everything.     Our mayor had
intervened.     It was all about me.

"What about Sampson?          At least leave him on the project murders," I
said to the chief of detectives.

"You got any complaints, take them up with the mayor.       You're both
working on this kidnapping.    That's all I have to say to you at this
time."

Pittman turned his back on us and walked away.        We

were on the Dunne-Goldberg kidnapping case, like it or not.       We
didn't like it.

"Maybe we should just go back to the Sanders house," I said to Sampson.

"Nobody miss us here," he agreed.

I WAS ALREADY BECOMING emotionally involved with the kidnapped children.
My sleep was restless and agitated that first night.   In my dreams,
I replayed several bad scenes at the school.     I saw Mustaf Sanders
again and again.     His sad eyes stared out at me, asking for help,
getting none from me.

I woke to find both my kids in bed with me.         At some time during the
early morning, they must have snuck aboard.            It's one of their
favorite tricks, their little jokes on "Big Daddy."

Damon and Janelle were fast asleep on top of a patchwork quilt.  I'd
been too wasted to pull it off the bed the night before. We must
have looked like two resting angels-and a fallen plow horse.

Damon is a beautiful little boy of six who always reminds me of how
special his mother was.      He has Maria's eyes.      Jannie is the
other apple of my eye.      She's four, going on fifteen.   She likes
to call me "Big Daddy," which sounds like some black slang she's
managed to invent.   Maybe she knew the foothall star "Big Daddy"
Lipscomb in some other life.

Also on the bed was a copy of William Styron's book on his depression,
Darkness Visible, which I'd been reading.   I was hoping it might
give me some clue to help me get over my own depression-which had
plagued me ever since Maria's murder.     Three years now, felt like
twenty.

What actually woke me that morning were headlights fanning across the
window blinds.      I heard a car door bang and the fast crunch of feet
on gravel in the driveway.     Careful not to wake the kids, I slipped
over to the bedroom window.

I peered down on two Metro D.C.       patrol cars parked behind the old
Porsche in our drive.    It looked miserably cold outside.   We
were just entering the deepest hollow of D.C.'s winter.

"Give me a break," I mumbled into the chilly window blinds.        "Go
away."

Sampson was heading for the back door to our kitchen.     It was twenty
to five on the clock next to the bed. Time to go to work.
Just before five that morning, Sampson and I pulled up in front of a
crumbling prewar brownstone in Georgetown, a block west of M Street.
We had decided to check out Soneji's apartment ourselves.       The only
way to get stuff done right is to do it yourself.

"Lights are all on.  Looks like somebody's home," Sampson said as we
climbed out of the car.  "Now who could it be?"

"Three guesses.      The first two don't count," I mum bled.     I was
suffering from early-morning queasiness.       A visit to the monster's
den wasn't going to help.

"The FBI.    Maybe Efrem Zimbalist, Jr., is up there," Sampson
guessed.     "Maybe they're filming Real Stories from the FBI."

"Let's go see."

We entered the building and took the narrow winding stairway up.          On
the second floor, yellow crime-scene tape had been placed in a
crisscross pattern across the doorway to Soneji's apartment.    It
didn't look like the place where a "Mr.  Chips" would live. More
like a Richard Ramirez or a Green River killer.

The scarred wooden door was open.        I could see two FBI techies
working inside.    A local deejay called The Greaseman was screeching
from a radio on the floor.

"Hey, Pete, what's doin'?"    I called inside.    I knew one of the
FBI techies on the job, Pete Schweitzer.       He looked up at the sound
of my voice.

"Well, look who's here.    Welcome to the Inner Sanctum.         "

"We came over to bother you.    See how it's done," Sampson said. We'd
both worked with Pete Schweitzer before, liked and trusted him as much
as you could any FBI personnel.

"Come in and make yourselves at home at Casa Soneji.         This is my
fellow flyshit finder and bagger, Todd Toohey.    Todd likes to listen
to The Greaseman in the A.m.        These two are ghouls like us, Toddie."

"The best, " I told Todd Toohey.    I had already started to nose
around the apartment.      Everything was feeling unreal again. There
was' this cold, damp spot inside my head.     Eerie-time.

The small studio apartment was a mess.        There wasn't furniture-a
bare mattress on the floor, an end table and lamp, a sofa that looked as
if it had been picked up off the street-but the floor was covered with
things.

Wrinkled sheets and towels and underwear were a large part of the
general chaos.     Two or three loads of laundry were spilled out on
the floor.   Most of the clutter was books and magazines, though.
Several hundred books, and at least that many magazines, were piled in
the single small room.

"Anything interesting so far?"    I asked Schweitzer. "You look
through his library?"

Schweitzer talked to me without looking up from a pile of books he was
dusting.    "Everything is interesting. Check out the books along the
wall.    Also, consider the fact that our fine-feathered friend wiped
down this whole fucking apartment before he split."

"He do a good job?       Up to your standards?"

' ''Excellent job. I couldn't have done much better myself.   We
haven't found a partial print anywhere.  Not even on any of those
goddainn books."

"Maybe he reads with plastic gloves on," I offered.

"I think he might.   I shit you not.   Place was dusted by a pro,
Alex."

I was crouched near several stacks of the books now. I read the titles
on several of the spines.  Most of it was nonfiction from the last
five years or so.

"True-crime fan," I said.

"Lots and lots of kidnapping stories," Schweitzer said.      He looked
up and pointed.      "Right side of the bed,
near the reading lamp.      That's the kidnapping section.

I walked over and looked at the volumes.       Most of the books had been
stolen from the library at Georgetown. I figured he must have had an I.
D.    to get into the stacks there.  Was he a past student? Maybe
a professor?
Several computer printouts were taped to the bare wall over his private
library on kidnapping.   I started to read down the lists. Aldo Moro.
Kidnapped in Rome.      Five bodyguards killed during abduction. Moro's
body found in a parked car. Jack Teich, released after payment of
$750,000.

J.    Reginald Murphy, editor of the Atlanta Constitution, released
after payment of $700,000.

J.   Paul Getty 3rd, released in southern Italy after $2.8 million
ransom paid.

Mrs.    Virginia Piper of Minneapolis, released after her husband paid
$1,000,000.

Victor E.    Samuelson, released in Argentina after payment of $14.2
million ransom.

I whistled as I spotted the amounts on his list. What was he going
to ask for Maggie Rose Dunne and Michael Goldberg?

It was a really small place, and there hadn't been much room for Soneji
to wipe off fingerprints.    Still, Schweitzer said he hadn't left
anything.      I wondered if Soneji could have been a cop.        That was
one way to plan a crime, and maybe improve your chances of getting away
with it.

"Come in here for a minute."        Sampson was in the bathroom that was
off to one side of the tiny studio.

The walls were papered with photos from magazines, newspapers, record
albums, book jackets.


He'd left a final surprise for us.   There were no fingerprints, but
he had scrawled a message.

Just over the mirror was a typeset headline: I WANT TO BE SOMEBODY!

Up on the walls was an exhibition.  I saw River Phoenix.   And
Matt Dillon.   There were photos from Helmut Newton books.     I
recognized Lennon's murderer, Mark David Chapman.      And Axl Rose.
Pete Rose was up on the wall, too.   And Neon Deon Sanders. Wayne
Williams was there.   And newspaper stories.     The Happy Land
Social Club fire in New York City.   A New York Times story of the
Lindbergh kidnapping.     A story about the kidnapping of Samuel
Bronfman, the Seagram's heir, and a story about the missing child Etan
Patz.

I thought about Soneji the kidnapper, all alone in his desolate
apartment.      He had carefully wiped every inch of
space for fingerprints.     The room itself was so small, so monkish. He
was a reader, or at least liked to have books around.       Then there
was his photo gallery.      What did it tell us?     Leads?
Misdirections? I stood in front of the mirror that was over the sink and
stared into it as I knew he had many, many times. What was I supposed to
see?       What had Gary Sonejl seen? "This was his picture on the
wall-the face in this mirror," I offered a theory to Sampson.     "It's
the key picture here, the central one.       He wants to be the star of
all this." Sampson was leaning against a wall of photos and news
clippings.     "Why no fingerprints, Dr. Freud?"

"He must know we have his fingerprints on file somewhere.        Makes me
think he may have been wearing some

of disguise at the school.  Maybe he put on makeup here before he
went off to school .   He could be a stage actor. I don't think
we've seen his face yet."

"I think the boy has big plans. He definitely wants to be a star,"
Sampson said. I want to be somebody!


THE HOSTAGE RESCUE TEAM arrived at Tamiami Airport in Florida at
four-thirty on Christmas afternoon.     Secretary Jerrold Goldberg had
arranged for us to fly down in a private jet supplied by the Air Force.
A Miami police escort rushed us to the FBI office on Collins Avenue,
near the Fountain bleu and other Gold Coast hotels.        The Bureau
office was only six blocks from the Western Union office where Soneji
had sent the telegram.

Had he known that?          Probably he had.     That was how his mind
seemed to work.         Soneji was a control freak.   I kept jotting
down observations on him.         There were already twenty pages in a
notepad I kept in my jacket.      I wasn't ready to write a profile of
Soneji since I had no information about his past yet.       My notes were
filled with all the right buzzwords, though: organized, sadistic,
methodical, controlling, perhaps hypomanic.

Was he watching us scurry around Miami now?          Quite possibly he was.
Maybe in another disguise.   Was he
remorseful about Michael Goldberg's death?        Or was he entering a
state of rage?

Private lines of emergency switchboard operators had already been set up
at the FBI office.   We didn't know how Soneji would communicate from
here on.     Several Miami police officers were added to the team now.
So were another two hundred agents from the Bureau's large force in
southern Florida.    Suddenly, everything was rush, rush, rush. Hurry
up and wait.

I wondered if Gary Soneji had any real idea about the state of chaos he
was creating as his deadline approached.      Was that part of his plan,
too?    Was Maggie Rose Dunne really okay?        Was she still alive?
We would need some proof before the final exchange would be approved. At
least we would ask Soneji for physical proof.  M.R.      fine so
far.   Trust me, he'd said. Sure thing, Gary.

Bad news followed us down to Miami Beach. The preliminary autopsy report
on Michael Goldberg had been faxed to the Miami Bureau office.         A
briefing was held immediately after we arrived, in the FBI's crisis
room.     We sat in a crescent arrangement of desks, each desk with its
own video monitor and word processor.       The room was unusually quiet.
None of us really wanted to hear details about the little boy's death.
A Bureau technical officer named Harold Friedman was chosen to explain
the medical findings to the group. Friedman was unusual for the Bureau,
to say the least. He was an Orthodox Jew, but with the build and look of
a Miami beachboy.      He wore a multicolored yannulke to the autopsy
briefing.
"We're reasonably certain the Goldberg boy's death

was accidental," he began in a deep, articulate voice.

"It appears that he was knocked out with a chloroform

spray first.   There were traces of chloroform in his nasal

passages and throat.    Then he was injected with secobarbital
sodium, probably about two hours later.   Secobarbital is a strong
anesthetic.  It also has properties which

can inhibit breathing.

"That seems to be what happened in this case.         The

boy's breathing probably became irregular, then his

heart and breathing stopped altogether.       It wasn't painful

if he remained asleep.       I suspect that he did, and that he

died in his sleep.

"There were also several broken bones," Harold Friedman went on. In
spite of the beachboy appearance,

he was somber and seemed intelligent in his reporting.

"We believe that the little boy was kicked and punched,

probably dozens of times.       This had nothing to do with

his death, though.       The broken bones and 'dents' on the

skin were inflicted after the boy was dead.      You should
know that he was also sexually abused after the time of

death.     He was sodomized, and ripped during the act.

This Soneji character is a very sick puppy," Friedman

offered as his first bit of editorializing.

This was also one of the few real specifics we had

about Gary Soneji's pathology.         Evidently, he had flown

into an angry rage when he discovered that Michael

Goldberg was dead.          Or that something about his perfect

plan wasn't so perfect after all.

Agents and policemen shifted from buttock to buttock

in their seats.       I wondered if the frenzy with Michael

Goldberg had a calming or inciteful effect on Soneji.

More than ever, I worried about the chances Maggie Rose had to survive.

The hotel we were staying at was directly across the street from the
Bureau branch office.       It wasn't much by Miami Beach gold standards,
but it did have a large terraced pool on the ocean side.

Around eleven, most of us had knocked off for the night.       The
temperature was still in the eighties.    The sky was full of bright
stars, and an occasional jetliner arriving from the North.

Sampson and I strolled across Collins Avenue.          People must have
thought the Lakers were in town to lay the

Miami Heat. 

"Want to eat first? Or just drink ourselves numb?" he asked me
midway across the avenue.

"I'm already pretty numb," I told Sampson.         "I was thinking about a
swim.     When in Miami Beach?"
"You can't get a Miami Beach tan tonight."      He was rolling an unlit
cigarette between his lips.

"That's another reason for a night swim."

"I'll be operating in the lounge," Sampson said as we branched off in
the lobby.      "I'll be the one drawing the pretty women." "Good luck,"
I called to him.       "It's Christmas.  I hope you get a present

I got into a bathing suit, and wandered out to the hotel pool.     I've
come to believe that the key to health is exercising, so I exercise
every day, no matter where I am.      I also do a lot of stretching,
which can be done anytime, anywhere.

The big swimming pool on the ocean side was closed,

but that didn't stop me.     Policemen are notorious for jaywalking,
double-parking, rule-breaking in general. It's our only perk. Someone
else had the same idea.       Somebody was swimming laps so smoothly and
quietly that I hadn't noticed until I was walking among the deck chairs,
feeling the cool wetness under my feet.

The swimmer was a woman, in a black or dark blue swimsuit.           She was
slender and athletic, with long arms and longer legs.     She was a
pretty sight on a not-so-pretty day.     Her stroke looked effortless,
and it was strong and rhythmic.      It seemed her private place, and I
didn't want to disturb it.

When she made her turn, I saw that it was Jezzie Flanagan.   That
surprised me. It seemed out of character for the Secret Service
supervisor.

I finally climbed down very quietly into the opposite end of the pool
and started my own laps.      It was nothing beautiful or rhythmic, but
my stroke gets the job done, and I can usually swim for a long time.

I did thirty-five laps easily. I felt as if I was loosened up for
the first time in a few days.   The cobwebs were beginning to go
away.       Maybe I'd do another twenty, then call it a night.    Or
maybe have a Christmas beer with Sampson.

When I stopped for a quick blow, Jezzie Flanagan was sitting right there
on the edge of a lounger.

A fluffy white hotel towel was thrown casually over her bare shoulders.
She was pretty in the moonlight over Miami.      Willowy, very blond,
bright blue eyes staring at me.

"Fifty laps, Detective Cross?"

She smiled, in -a way that revealed a different person from the one I'd
seen at work over the past few days. She seemed much more relaxed.

"Thirty-five.   I'm not exactly in your league," I said to her. "Not
even close.     I learned my stroke at the

downtown Y."

"You persevere."      She kept her smile turned on nicely.      "You're
in good shape."

"Whatever my stroke is called, it sure feels good tonight.   After
all those hours cooped up in that room. Those boxy little windows that
don't open."

"If they had big windows, all anybody would think about is escaping to
the beach.     They'd never get any work done anywhere in the state of
Florida."

"Are we getting any work done?"       I asked Jezzie. She laughed. "I had
a friend who believed in the 'doing the best you can' theory of police
work.     I'm doing the best I can.    Under impossible
circumstances. How about you?"

"I'm doing the best I can, too," I said.

"Praise the Lord."  Jezzie Flanagan raised both her arms joyously.
Her exuberance surprised me.    It was funny, and it felt good to
laugh for a change.   Real good Real necessary.

Under the circumstances, I'm doing the best I can, I added.

"Under the circumstances, praise the Lord!"     Jezzie raised her voice
again.   She was funny, or it was late, or both of the above .

"You going to catch a bite?"    I asked her.      I wanted to hear her
thoughts about the case.     I hadn't really talked to her before.

"I'd like to eat something," she answered.     "I've skipped two meals
already today.      "

We agreed to meet up in the hotel's dining room, which was one of those
slow-spinning affairs on the top floor.

She changed in about five minutes, which I found impressive.       Baggy
tan trousers, a V-necked T-shirt, black Chinese slippers.    Her blond
hair was still wet. She'd combed it back, and it looked good that way.
She didn't wear makeup, and didn't need to.       She seemed so different
from the way she acted on the job-much looser and at ease.

"In all honesty and fairness, I have to tell you one thing."    She
was laughing.

"What's the one thing?"

"Well, you're a strong but really clunky swimmer. On the other hand, you
do look good in a bathing suit.     "

Both of us laughed.     Some of the long day's tension began to drain
away.

We were good at drawing each other out over beers and a snack.         A
lot of that was due to the peculiar circumstances, the stress and
pressure of the past few days. It's also part of my job to draw people
out, and I like the challenge.

I got Jezzie Flanagan to admit that she'd once been Miss Washington,
D.C., back when she was eighteen. She'd been in a sorority at the
University of Virginia, but got kicked out for "inappropriate behavior,"
a phrase that I loved.

As we talked, though, I was surprised that I was telling her much more
than I'd expected to.   She was easy to talk to.

Jezzie asked about my early days as a psychologist in Washington. "It
was mostly a bad mistake," I told her, without getting into how angry it
had made me, still made me.         "A whole lot of people didn't want any
part of a black shrink.    Too many black people couldn't afford one.
There are no liberals on the,psychiatrist's couch. " She got me to talk
about Maria, but only a little bit.   She told me how it was to be a
woman in the ninety-percent macho-male Secret Service.            "They like
to test me, oh, about once a day.       They call me 'the Man.' " She
also had some entertaining war stories about the White House.           She
knew the Bushes and the Reagans.          All in all, it was a comfortable
hour that went by too quickly.

Actually, more than an hour had passed.        More like two hours. Jezzie
finally noticed our waitress hovering all by her lonesome near the bar.
"Shoot.    We are the last ones in this restaurant." We paid our bill
and got on the local elevator down from the spinning-top restaurant.
Jezzie's room was on the higher floor.     She probably had a view of
the ocean, too.    From her suite.

"That was real nice," I said at her stop.   I think that's a snappy
line out of a Noal Coward play.       "Thanks for the company.      Merry
Christmas."

"Merry Christmas, Alex.    " Jezzie smiled.      She tucked her blond
hair behind her ear, which was a tic of hers I'd noticed before. "That
was nice.    Unfortunately, tomorrow probably won't be.       "

Jezzie pecked my cheek, and went off to her room. "I'm going to dream
about you in swimsuits," she said as the elevator doors closed.

I went down four more floors, where I took my Christcold shower, alone
in my Christmas hotel room.        I thought about Jezzie Flanagan. Dumb
fantasies in a lonely Miami Beach hotel room.          We sure weren't going
anywhere together, but I liked her.      I kind of felt that I could
talk to her about anything.     I read some more about Styron's bout
with depression, until I could sleep.     I had some dreams of my own.


I'D NEVER HAD MUCH TROUBLE laughing at my frustrations as a cop or a
psychologist.   This time it was lot tougher to take in stride.
Soneji had beaten us down South, in Florida and Carolina.       We hadn't
gotten Maggie Rose back.      We didn't know if she was alive or dead.

After I was debriefed for five hours by the Federal Bureau, I was flown
up to Washington where I got to answer all the same questions from my
own department. One of the last inquisitors was Chief of Detectives
Pittman.     The Jefe appeared at midnight.     He was all showered
and shaved for the occasion of our special meeting.

"You look like absolute hell," he said to me.   Those were the first
words out of his mouth.

"I've been up since yesterday morning, " I explained. "I know how I
look.    Tell me something I don't already know.

I knew that was a mistake before the words got out.
I don't usually lead with my chin, but I was groggy and tired and
generally fucked up by that time.

The Jefe leaned forward on one of the little metal chairs in his
conference room.      I could see his gold fillings as he spoke to me.
"Sure thing, Cross.     I have to blow you off the kidnapping case.
Right or wrong, the press is pinning a lot of what went haywire on you,
and us.    The FBI isn't taking any of the heat.      Thomas Dunne's
making a lot of noise, too.    Seems fair to me. The ransom's gone; we
don't have his daughter."

"Most of that is pure bullshit," I told Chief Pittman. "Soneji asked for
me to be the contact.      Nobody knows why yet.         Maybe I shouldn't
have gone, but I did.     The FBI blew the surveillance, not me."

"Now tell me something I don't already know," Pittman came back.
"Anyway, you and Sampson can go back on the Sanders and Turner murders.
Just the way you wanted it in the first place.   I don't mind if you
stay in the background on the kidnapping.      That's all there is to
talk about.    " The Jefe said his piece, and then he left.    Over
and out.     No discussion of the matter.

Sampson and I had been put back in our place: Washington Southeast.
Everybody had their priorities straight now. The murders of six
black people mattered again.

IN THE NIGHT OF JANUARY I 1, Gary Murphy was cozy and safe in his
basement.    Nobody knew that he was down there, but if snoopy Missy
happened to open the basement door, he'd just flick on the lamp at his
workbench.    He was thinking everything through. One more time for
good measure.

He was becoming nicely obsessed with murdering Missy and Roni, but he
thought that he wouldn't do it just yet.    Still, the fantasy was
rich.    To murder your own family had a certain homespun style to it
It wasn't very imaginative, but the effect would be neat: the icy chill
racing through the serene, dippity-doo suburban community.         All the
other families doing the most ironic thing-locking their doors, locking
themselves in together.

Around midnight he realized that his little family had gone to bed
without him.  No one had even bothered to call down to him. They
didn't care. A hollow roar was
starting inside his head.   He needed about a half-dozen Nuprins to
stop the white noise for a while.

Maybe he would torch the perfect little house on Central Avenue.

Torching houses was good for the soul. He'd done it before; he'd do it
again.     God, his whole skull ached as if somebody'd been hitting it
with a ball peen hammer.     Was something physically the matter with
him?     Was it possible he was going mad this time?

He tried to think about the Lone Eagle@arles Lindbergh.       That didn't
work, either.    In his mind, he revisited the farmhouse in Hopewell
Junction.     No good. That mind-trip was getting old, too.

He was world famous himself, for Chrissakes.  He was famous now.
Everybody in the world knew about him.    He was a media star all over
Planet Dearth.

.    He finally left the cellar, and then the house in Wilmington. It
was just past five-thirty in the morning.      As he walked outside to
the car, he felt like an animal, suddenly on the loose.

He drove back to D.C.       There was more work to do there.       He
didn't want his public to be disappointed, did he?

He thought he had a treat for everyone now.       Don't get comfortable
with me!

Around eleven that morning, Tuesday, Gary Murphy lightly tapped the
front doorbell of a well-kept brick townhouse on the edge of Capitol
Hill.    Bing-bong went a polite door chime inside.

The sheer danger of the situation, of his being in Washington again,
gave him a nice chill.  This was a lot

better than being in hiding.    He felt alive again, he could breathe,
he had his own space.

Vivian Kim kept the lock chain on, but she opened the door about a foot.
She'd seen the familiar uniform of Washington's PEPCO public utilities
service through the peephole.

Pretty lady, Gary remembered from the Washington Day School.             Long
black braids.    Cute little upturned nose.  She clearly didn't
recognize him as a blond.       No mustache.  Little flesh off the
cheeks and chin.

"Yes?    What is it?   Can I help you?"    she asked the man
standing on her porch.  Inside the house, jazzy music was playing.
Thelonious.

"I hope it's the other way around."  He smiled pleasantly. "Somebody
called about an overcharge on the electric.

Vivian Kim frowned and shook her head.     She had a tiny map of Korea
hanging from rawhide around her neck.    "I didn't call anybody. I
know I didn't call PEPCO." "Well, somebody called us, miss."

"Come back some other time," Vivian Kim told him.    "Maybe my
boyfriend called. You'll have to come back.     I'm sony.

Gary shrugged his shoulders.     This was so delicious. He didn't want
it to end.   "I guess.    You can call us again if you like," he
said.     "Get on the schedule again. It's an overcharge, though. You
paid too much."

"Okay.     I hear you.    I understand."

Vivian Kim slowly stripped away the chain and opened the door.    Gary
stepped into the apartment.   He pulled a long hunting knife from
under his work jacket.

He pointed it at the teacher's face.      "Don't scream.   Do not
scream, Vivian."

"How do you know my name?"             she asked.   "Who
are you?"

"Don't raise your voice, Vivian.     There's no reason to be afraid....
I've done this before.    I'm just your garden-variety robber.    "

"What do you want?"          The teacher had begun to tremble.

Gary thought for a second before he answered her scared-rabbit question.
"I want to send out another message over the TV, I guess.       I want
the fame I so richly deserve," he finally said.  "I want to be the
scariest man in America.     That's why I work in the capital.    I'm
Gary. Don't you remember me, Viv?"


IT TURNED OUT to be another very long day in Wilkinsburg, Pennsylvania.
We interviewed each person who had been kept hostage inside the
McDonald's. The FBI, meanwhile, had taken custody of Soneji/Murphy I
stayed over that night.   So did Jezzie Flanagan.    We were
together for a second night in a row.   Nothing I wanted more.

As soon as we got inside a room at the Cheshire Inn, in nearby Millvale,
Jezzie said, "Will you just hold me for a minute or two, Alex.        I
probably look a little more stable than I really feel." I liked holding
her, and being held back.     I liked the way she smelled.       I liked
the way she fit into my arms. Everything still felt electric between us.

I was excited by the thought of being with her again. There have been
only a couple of people I can open up to.    No woman since Maria. I
had a feeling Jezzie could be one of those people, and I needed to be
connected
with someone again.       It had taken me a while to figure that one out.

"Isn't this weird?" she whispered.         "Two cops in hot pursuit. "
Her body was trembling as I held her.       Her hand softly stroked my
arm.

I had never been a committed one-night-stand type, and I thought that I
probably wouldn't start now.     That raised some problems and
theoretical questions that I wasn't ready to deal with yet.

Jezzie closed her eyes.  "Hold me for one more minute," she
whispered.    "You know what's really nice? Being with someone who
understands what you've been through.     My husband never understood
The Job."

"Me neither.      In fact, I understand it less every day," I joked. But
I was partly telling the truth.

I held Jezzie for a lot longer than a couple of minutes. She had a
startling, ageless beauty.      I liked looking at her.

"This is so strange, Alex. Nice strange, but strange, she said. "Is
this whole thing a dream?"

"Can't be a dream.      My middle name is Isaiah.        You didn't know
that.

Jezzie shook her head.      "I knew your middle name was Isaiah.   I
saw it on a report from the Bureau.    Alexander Isaiah Cross.   "

"I see how you got to the top," I said to her.     "What else do you
know about me?"

"All in good time," Jezzie said.    She touched a finger to my lips.

The Cheshire was a picturesque country inn about ten miles north of
Wilkinsburg.     Jezzie had run in to get us

a room.     So far, no one had seen us together at the inn, which was
fine by both of us.

Our room was in a whitewashed carriage house that was detached from the
main building.    It was filled with authentic-looking antiques,
including a hand loom and several quilts.

There was a woodbuming fireplace, and we started a fire.         Jezzie
ordered champagne from room service.

"Let's celebrate.   Let's do up the town," she said as she put down
the phone receiver.    "We deserve something special.       We got the
bad guy." The inn, the corner room, everything was just about pe rfect.
A bay window looked down over a snowcovered lawn, to a lake slicked with
ice.    A steep mountain range loomed behind the lake.

We sipped champagne in front of the blazing fire. I'd been worried about
the aftereffects of our night in Wilmington, but there were none. We
talked easily, and when it got quiet, that was all right, too.

We ordered a late dinner.

The room-service guy was clearly uncomfortable as he set up our dinner
trays in front of the fire. He couldn't get the warming oven open;
and he nearly dropped an entire tray of food.    Guess he'd never seen
a living, breathing taboo before.

"It's okay," Jezzie said to the man.     "We're both cops and this is
perfectly legal.    Trust me on it." We talked for the next hour and a
half.    It reminded me of being a kid, having a friend over for the
night. We both let our hair down a little, then a lot.  There wasn't
much self-consciousness between us.          She got me

talking about Damon and Jannie and wouldn't let me stop.

Supper was roast beef with something masqueradin

as Yorkshire pudding.        It didn't matter. When Jezzie finished
the last bite, she started to laugh.      We were both doing that a lot.

"Why did I finish all that food? I don't even like good Yorkshire
pudding.     God, we're having fun for a change!"

"What do we do now?"        I asked her.    "in the spirit of fun and
celebration."

"I don't know. What are you up for?      I'll bet they have really
neat board games back at the main building. I'm one of a hundred living
people who knows how to play Parcheesi.

Jezzie craned her neck so she could see out the window.    "Or, we
could hike down by the lake.   Sing 'Winter Wonderland.' "

"Yeah.     We could do some ice-skating.      I ice-skate. I'm a wizard
on skates.   Was that in my FBI report?"

Jezzie grinned and slapped her knees.      "That I'd like to see. I'd
pay real good money to see you skate.

"Forgot my skates, though."

"Oh, well.  What else?       I mean, I like you too much, I respect
you too much, to let you think I might be interested in your body."

"To be absolutely truthful and frank, I'm a little interested in your
body," I said.    The two of us kissed, and it still felt pretty good
to me.     The fire crackled.    The champagne was ice-cold. Fire and
ice.    Yin and yang. All kinds of opposites attracting. Wildfire in
the wilds.

We didn't get to sleep until seven the following morning.   
 We even walked down to the lake, where we skated on our shoes
in the moonlight.

Jezzie leaned in and she kissed me in the middle of the lake.       Very
serious kiss.   Big-girl kiss.

"Oh, Alex," she whispered against my cheek, "I think this is going to be
real trouble."