Bella,

I don't know why you're making Charlie carry notes to Billy like we're in second grade - if I
wanted to talk to you I would answer the

You made the choice here, okay? You can't have it both ways when

What part of 'mortal enemies' is too complicated for you to

Look, I know I'm being a jerk, but there's just no way around

We can't be friends when you're spending all your time with a bunch of

It just makes it worse when I think about you too much, so don't write anymore

Yeah, I miss you, too. A lot. Doesn't change anything. Sorry.

Jacob

I ran my fingers across the page, feeling the dents where he had pressed the pen to the paper
so hard that it had nearly broken through. I could picture him writing this - scrawling the
angry letters in his rough handwriting, slashing through line after line when the words came
out wrong, maybe even snapping the pen in his too-big hand; that would explain the ink
splatters. I could imagine the frustration pulling his black eyebrows together and crumpling
his forehead. If I'd been there, I might have laughed.Don't give yourself a brain hemorrhage,
Jacob, I would have told him.Just spit it out.

Laughing was the last thing I felt like doing now as I reread the words I'd already
memorized. His answer to my pleading note - passed from Charlie to Billy to him, just like
second grade, as he'd pointed out - was no surprise. I'd known the essence of what it would
say before I'd opened it.

What was surprising was how much each crossed-out line wounded me - as if the points of
the letters had cutting edges. More than that, behind each angry beginning lurked a vast pool
of hurt; Jacob's pain cut me deeper than my own.

While I was pondering this, I caught the unmistakable scent of a smoking burner rising from
the kitchen. In another house, the fact that someone besides myself was cooking might not
be a cause for panicking.

I shoved the wrinkled paper into my back pocket and ran, making it downstairs in the nick of
time.

The jar of spaghetti sauce Charlie'd stuck in the microwave was only on its first revolution
when I yanked the door open and pulled it out.
"What did I do wrong?" Charlie demanded.

"You're supposed to take the lid off first, Dad. Metal's bad for microwaves." I swiftly
removed the lid as I spoke, poured half the sauce into a bowl, and then put the bowl inside
the microwave and the jar back in the fridge; I fixed the time and pressed start.

Charlie watched my adjustments with pursed lips. "Did I get the noodles right?"

I looked in the pan on the stove - the source of the smell that had alerted me. "Stirring helps,"
I said mildly. I found a spoon and tried to de-clump the mushy hunk that was scalded to the
bottom.

Charlie sighed.

"So what's all this about?" I asked him.

He folded his arms across his chest and glared out the back windows into the sheeting rain.
"Don't know what you're talking about," he grumbled.

I was mystified. Charlie cooking? And what was with the surly attitude? Edward wasn't here
yet; usually my dad reserved this kind of behavior for my boyfriend's benefit, doing his best to
illustrate the theme of "unwelcome" with every word and posture. Charlie's efforts were
unnecessary - Edward knew exactly what my dad was thinking without the show.

The word boyfriend had me chewing on the inside of my cheek with a familiar tension while I
stirred. It wasn't the right word, not at all. I needed something more expressive of eternal
commitment. . . . But words like destiny and fate sounded hokey when you used them in
casual conversation.

Edward had another word in mind, and that word was the source of the tension I felt. It put
my teeth on edge just to think it to myself.

Fiancée. Ugh. I shuddered away from the thought.

"Did I miss something? Since when do you make dinner?" I asked Charlie. The pasta lump
bobbed in the boiling water as I poked it. "Or try to make dinner, I should say."

Charlie shrugged. "There's no law that says I can't cook in my own house."

"You would know," I replied, grinning as I eyed the badge pinned to his leather jacket.

"Ha. Good one." He shrugged out of the jacket as if my glance had reminded him he still had
it on, and hung it on the peg reserved for his gear. His gun belt was already slung in place -
he hadn't felt the need to wear that to the station for a few weeks. There had been no more
disturbing disappearances to trouble the small town of Forks, Washington, no more sightings
of the giant, mysterious wolves in the ever-rainy woods. . . .
I prodded the noodles in silence, guessing that Charlie would get around to talking about
whatever was bothering him in his own time. My dad was not a man of many words, and the
effort he had put into trying to orchestrate a sit-down dinner with me made it clear there
were an uncharacteristic number of words on his mind.

I glanced at the clock routinely - something I did every few minutes around this time. Less
than a half hour to go now.

Afternoons were the hardest part of my day. Ever since my former best friend (and
werewolf), Jacob Black, had informed on me about the motorcycle I'd been riding on the sly -
a betrayal he had devised in order to get me grounded so that I couldn't spend time with my
boyfriend (and vampire), Edward Cullen - Edward had been allowed to see me only from
seven till nine-thirty p.m., always inside the confines of my home and under the supervision
of my dad's unfailingly crabby glare.

This was an escalation from the previous, slightly less stringent grounding that I'd earned for
an unexplained three-day disappearance and one episode of cliff diving.

Of course, I still saw Edward at school, because there wasn't anything Charlie could do
about that. And then, Edward spent almost every night in my room, too, but Charlie wasn't
precisely aware of that. Edward's ability to climb easily and silently through my second-story
window was almost as useful as his ability to read Charlie's mind.

Though the afternoon was the only time I spent away from Edward, it was enough to make
me restless, and the hours always dragged. Still, I endured my punishment without
complaining because - for one thing - I knew I'd earned it, and - for another - because I
couldn't bear to hurt my dad by moving out now, when a much more permanent separation
hovered, invisible to Charlie, so close on my horizon.

My dad sat down at the table with a grunt and unfolded the damp newspaper there; within
seconds he was clucking his tongue in disapproval.

"I don't know why you read the news, Dad. It only ticks you off."

He ignored me, grumbling at the paper in his hands. "This is why everyone wants to live in a
small town! Ridiculous."

"What have big cities done wrong now?"

"Seattle's making a run for murder capital of the country. Five unsolved homicides in the last
two weeks. Can you imagine living like that?"

"I think Phoenix is actually higher up the homicide list, Dad. I have lived like that." And I'd
never come close to being a murder victim until after I moved to his safe little town. In fact, I
was still on several hit lists. . . . The spoon shook in my hands, making the water tremble.
"Well, you couldn't pay me enough," Charlie said.

I gave up on saving dinner and settled for serving it; I had to use a steak knife to cut a
portion of spaghetti for Charlie and then myself, while he watched with a sheepish
expression. Charlie coated his helping with sauce and dug in. I disguised my own clump as
well as I could and followed his example without much enthusiasm. We ate in silence for a
moment. Charlie was still scanning the news, so I picked up my much-abused copy of
Wuthering Heights from where I'd left it this morning at breakfast, and tried to lose myself in
turn-of-the-century England while I waited for him to start talking.

I was just to the part where Heathcliff returns when Charlie cleared his throat and threw the
paper to the floor.

"You're right," Charlie said. "I did have a reason for doing this." He waved his fork at the
gluey spread. "I wanted to talk to you."

I laid the book aside; the binding was so destroyed that it slumped flat to the table. "You
could have just asked."

He nodded, his eyebrows pulling together. "Yeah. I'll remember that next time. I thought
taking dinner off your hands would soften you up."

I laughed. "It worked - your cooking skills have me soft as a marshmallow. What do you
need, Dad?"

"Well, it's about Jacob."

I felt my face harden. "What about him?" I asked through stiff lips.

"Easy, Bells. I know you're still upset that he told on you, but it was the right thing. He was
being responsible."

"Responsible," I repeated scathingly, rolling my eyes. "Right. So, what about Jacob?"

The careless question repeated inside my head, anything but trivial. What about Jacob? What
was I going to do about him? My former best friend who was now . . . what? My enemy? I
cringed.

Charlie's face was suddenly wary. "Don't get mad at me, okay?"

"Mad?"

"Well, it's about Edward, too."

My eyes narrowed.

Charlie's voice got gruffer. "I let him in the house, don't I?"
"You do," I admitted. "For brief periods of time. Of course, you might let me out of the house
for brief periods now and then, too," I continued - only jokingly; I knew I was on lockdown
for the duration of the school year. "I've been pretty good lately."

"Well, that's kind of where I was heading with this. . . ." And then Charlie's face stretched
into an unexpected eye-crinkling grin; for a second he looked twenty years younger.

I saw a dim glimmer of possibility in that smile, but I proceeded slowly. "I'm confused, Dad.
Are we talking about Jacob, or Edward, or me being grounded?"

The grin flashed again. "Sort of all three."

"And how do they relate?" I asked, cautious.

"Okay." He sighed, raising his hands as if in surrender. "So I'm thinking maybe you deserve a
parole for good behavior. For a teenager, you're amazingly non-whiney."

My voice and eyebrows shot up. "Seriously? I'm free?"

Where was this coming from? I'd been positive I would be under house arrest until I actually
moved out, and Edward hadn't picked up any wavering in Charlie's thoughts. . . .

Charlie held up one finger. "Conditionally."

The enthusiasm vanished. "Fantastic," I groaned.

"Bella, this is more of a request than a demand, okay? You're free. But I'm hoping you'll use
that freedom . . . judiciously."

"What does that mean?"

He sighed again. "I know you're satisfied to spend all of your time with Edward -"

"I spend time with Alice, too," I interjected. Edward's sister had no hours of visitation; she
came and went as she pleased. Charlie was putty in her capable hands.

"That's true," he said. "But you have other friends besides the Cullens, Bella. Or you used
to."

We stared at each other for a long moment.

"When was the last time you spoke to Angela Weber?" he threw at me.

"Friday at lunch," I answered immediately.

Before Edward's return, my school friends had polarized into two groups. I liked to think of
those groups as good vs. evil. Us and them worked, too. The good guys were Angela, her
steady boyfriend Ben Cheney, and Mike Newton; these three had all very generously
forgiven me for going crazy when Edward left. Lauren Mallory was the evil core of the them
side, and almost everyone else, including my first friend in Forks, Jessica Stanley, seemed
content to go along with her anti-Bella agenda.

With Edward back at school, the dividing line had become even more distinct.

Edward's return had taken its toll on Mike's friendship, but Angela was unswervingly loyal,
and Ben followed her lead. Despite the natural aversion most humans felt toward the
Cullens, Angela sat dutifully beside Alice every day at lunch. After a few weeks, Angela even
looked comfortable there. It was difficult not to be charmed by the Cullens - once one gave
them the chance to be charming.

"Outside of school?" Charlie asked, calling my attention back.

"I haven't seen anyone outside of school, Dad. Grounded, remember? And Angela has a
boyfriend, too. She's always with Ben. If I'm really free," I added, heavy on the skepticism,
"maybe we could double."

"Okay. But then . . ." He hesitated. "You and Jake used to be joined at the hip, and now -"

I cut him off. "Can you get to the point, Dad? What's your condition - exactly?"

"I don't think you should dump all your other friends for your boyfriend, Bella," he said in a
stern voice. "It's not nice, and I think your life would be better balanced if you kept some
other people in it. What happened last September . . ."

I flinched.

"Well," he said defensively. "If you'd had more of a life outside of Edward Cullen, it might
not have been like that."

"It would have been exactly like that," I muttered.

"Maybe, maybe not."

"The point?" I reminded him.

"Use your new freedom to see your other friends, too. Keep it balanced."

I nodded slowly. "Balance is good. Do I have specific time quotas to fill, though?"

He made a face, but shook his head. "I don't want to make this complicated. Just don't forget
your friends . . ."

It was a dilemma I was already struggling with. My friends. People who, for their own safety,
I would never be able to see again after graduation.

So what was the better course of action? Spend time with them while I could? Or start the
separation now to make it more gradual? I quailed at the idea of the second option.

". . . particularly Jacob," Charlie added before I could think things through more than that.

A greater dilemma than the first. It took me a moment to find the right words. "Jacob might
be . . . difficult."

"The Blacks are practically family, Bella," he said, stern and fatherly again. "And Jacob has
been a very, very good friend to you."

"I know that."

"Don't you miss him at all?" Charlie asked, frustrated.

My throat suddenly felt swollen; I had to clear it twice before I answered. "Yes, I do miss
him," I admitted, still looking down. "I miss him a lot."

"Then why is it difficult?"

It wasn't something I was at liberty to explain. It was against the rules for normal people
-human people like me and Charlie - to know about the clandestine world full of myths and
monsters that existed secretly around us. I knew all about that world - and I was in no small
amount of trouble as a result. I wasn't about to get Charlie in the same trouble.

"With Jacob there is a . . . conflict," I said slowly. "A conflict about the friendship thing, I
mean. Friendship doesn't always seem to be enough for Jake." I wound my excuse out of
details that were true but insignificant, hardly crucial compared to the fact that Jacob's
werewolf pack bitterly hated Edward's vampire family - and therefore me, too, as I fully
intended to join that family. It just wasn't something I could work out with him in a note,
and he wouldn't answer my calls. But my plan to deal with the werewolf in person had
definitely not gone over well with the vampires.

"Isn't Edward up for a little healthy competition?" Charlie's voice was sarcastic now.

I leveled a dark look at him. "There's no competition."

"You're hurting Jake's feelings, avoiding him like this. He'd rather be just friends than
nothing."

Oh, now I was avoiding him ?

"I'm pretty sure Jake doesn't want to be friends at all." The words burned in my mouth.
"Where'd you get that idea, anyway?"

Charlie looked embarrassed now. "The subject might have come up today with Billy. . . ."

"You and Billy gossip like old women," I complained, stabbing my fork viciously into the
congealed spaghetti on my plate.
"Billy's worried about Jacob," Charlie said. "Jake's having a hard time right now. . . . He's
depressed."

I winced, but kept my eyes on the blob.

"And then you were always so happy after spending the day with Jake." Charlie sighed.

"I'm happy now ," I growled fiercely through my teeth.

The contrast between my words and tone broke through the tension. Charlie burst into
laughter, and I had to join in.

"Okay, okay," I agreed. "Balance."

"And Jacob," he insisted.

"I'll try."

"Good. Find that balance, Bella. And, oh, yeah, you've got some mail," Charlie said, closing
the subject with no attempt at subtlety. "It's by the stove."

I didn't move, my thoughts twisting into snarls around Jacob's name. It was most likely junk
mail; I'd just gotten a package from my mom yesterday and I wasn't expecting anything else.

Charlie shoved his chair away from the table and stretched as he got to his feet. He took his
plate to the sink, but before he turned the water on to rinse it, he paused to toss a thick
envelope at me. The letter skidded across the table and thunked into my elbow.

"Er, thanks," I muttered, puzzled by his pushiness. Then I saw the return address - the letter
was from the University of Alaska Southeast. "That was quick. I guess I missed the deadline
on that one, too."

Charlie chuckled.

I flipped the envelope over and then glared up at him. "It's open."

"I was curious."

"I'm shocked, Sheriff. That's a federal crime."

"Oh, just read it."

I pulled out the letter, and a folded schedule of courses.

"Congratulations," he said before I could read anything. "Your first acceptance."

"Thanks, Dad."
"We should talk about tuition. I've got some money saved up -"

"Hey, hey, none of that. I'm not touching your retirement, Dad. I've got my college fund."
What was left of it - and there hadn't been much to begin with.

Charlie frowned. "Some of these places are pretty pricey, Bells. I want to help. You don't
have to go to all the way to Alaska just because it's cheaper."

It wasn't cheaper, not at all. But it was far away, and Juneau had an average of three hundred
twenty-one overcast days per year. The first was my prerequisite, the second was Edward's.

"I've got it covered. Besides, there's lots of financial aid out there. It's easy to get loans." I
hoped my bluff wasn't too obvious. I hadn't actually done a lot of research on the subject.

"So . . . ," Charlie began, and then he pursed his lips and looked away.

"So what?"

"Nothing. I was just . . ." He frowned. "Just wondering what . . . Edward's plans are for next
year?"

"Oh."

"Well?"

Three quick raps on the door saved me. Charlie rolled his eyes and I jumped up.

"Coming!" I called while Charlie mumbled something that sounded like, "Go away." I
ignored him and went to let Edward in.

I wrenched the door out of my way - ridiculously eager - and there he was, my personal
miracle.

Time had not made me immune to the perfection of his face, and I was sure that I would
never take any aspect of him for granted. My eyes traced over his pale white features: the
hard square of his jaw, the softer curve of his full lips - twisted up into a smile now, the
straight line of his nose, the sharp angle of his cheekbones, the smooth marble span of his
forehead - partially obscured by a tangle of rain-darkened bronze hair. . . .

I saved his eyes for last, knowing that when I looked into them I was likely to lose my train
of thought. They were wide, warm with liquid gold, and framed by a thick fringe of black
lashes. Staring into his eyes always made me feel extraordinary - sort of like my bones were
turning spongy. I was also a little lightheaded, but that could have been because I'd forgotten
to keep breathing. Again.

It was a face any male model in the world would trade his soul for. Of course, that might be
exactly the asking price: one soul.
No. I didn't believe that. I felt guilty for even thinking it, and was glad - as I was often glad -
that I was the one person whose thoughts were a mystery to Edward.

I reached for his hand, and sighed when his cold fingers found mine. His touch brought with
it the strangest sense of relief - as if I'd been in pain and that pain had suddenly ceased.

"Hey." I smiled a little at my anticlimactic greeting.

He raised our interlaced fingers to brush my cheek with the back of his hand. "How was your
afternoon?"

"Slow."

"For me, as well."

He pulled my wrist up to his face, our hands still twisted together. His eyes closed as his nose
skimmed along the skin there, and he smiled gently without opening them. Enjoying the
bouquet while resisting the wine, as he'd once put it.

I knew that the scent of my blood - so much sweeter to him than any other person's blood,
truly like wine beside water to an alcoholic - caused him actual pain from the burning thirst it
engendered. But he didn't seem to shy away from it as much as he once had. I could only
dimly imagine the Herculean effort behind this simple gesture.

It made me sad that he had to try so hard. I comforted myself with the knowledge that I
wouldn't be causing him pain much longer.

I heard Charlie approaching then, stamping his feet on the way to express his customary
displeasure with our guest. Edward's eyes snapped open and he let our hands fall, keeping
them twined.

"Good evening, Charlie." Edward was always flawlessly polite, though Charlie didn't deserve
it.

Charlie grunted at him, and then stood there with his arms crossed over his chest. He was
taking the idea of parental supervision to extremes lately.

"I brought another set of applications," Edward told me then, holding up a stuffed manila
envelope. He was wearing a roll of stamps like a ring around his littlest finger.

I groaned. How were there any colleges left that he hadn't forced me to apply to already?
And how did he keep finding these loophole openings? It was so late in the year.

He smiled as if he could read my thoughts; they must have been very obvious on my face.
"There are still a few open deadlines. And a few places willing to make exceptions."

I could just imagine the motivations behind such exceptions. And the dollar amounts
involved.

Edward laughed at my expression.

"Shall we?" he asked, towing me toward the kitchen table.

Charlie huffed and followed behind, though he could hardly complain about the activity on
tonight's agenda. He'd been pestering me to make a decision about college on a daily basis.

I cleared the table quickly while Edward organized an intimidating stack of forms. When I
moved Wuthering Heights to the counter, Edward raised one eyebrow. I knew what he was
thinking, but Charlie interrupted before Edward could comment.

"Speaking of college applications, Edward," Charlie said, his tone even more sullen - he tried
to avoid addressing Edward directly, and when he had to, it exacerbated his bad mood.
"Bella and I were just talking about next year. Have you decided where you're going to
school?"

Edward smiled up at Charlie and his voice was friendly. "Not yet. I've received a few
acceptance letters, but I'm still weighing my options."

"Where have you been accepted?" Charlie pressed.

"Syracuse . . . Harvard . . . Dartmouth . . . and I just got accepted to the University of Alaska
Southeast today." Edward turned his face slightly to the side so that he could wink at me. I
stifled a giggle.

"Harvard? Dartmouth?" Charlie mumbled, unable to conceal his awe. "Well that's pretty . . .
that's something. Yeah, but the University of Alaska . . . you wouldn't really consider that
when you could go Ivy League. I mean, your father would want you to . . ."

"Carlisle's always fine with whatever I choose to do," Edward told him serenely.

"Hmph."

"Guess what, Edward?" I asked in a bright voice, playing along.

"What, Bella?"

I pointed to the thick envelope on the counter. "I just got my acceptance to the University of
Alaska!"

"Congratulations!" He grinned. "What a coincidence."

Charlie's eyes narrowed and he glared back and forth between the two of us. "Fine," he
muttered after a minute. "I'm going to go watch the game, Bella. Nine-thirty."

That was his usual parting command.
"Er, Dad? Remember the very recent discussion about my freedom . . . ?"

He sighed. "Right. Okay, ten -thirty. You still have a curfew on school nights."

"Bella's no longer grounded?" Edward asked. Though I knew he wasn't really surprised, I
couldn't detect any false note to the sudden excitement in his voice.

"Conditionally," Charlie corrected through his teeth. "What's it to you?"

I frowned at my dad, but he didn't see.

"It's just good to know," Edward said. "Alice has been itching for a shopping partner, and I'm
sure Bella would love to see some city lights." He smiled at me.

But Charlie growled, "No!" and his face flushed purple.

"Dad! What's the problem?"

He made an effort to unclench his teeth. "I don't want you going to Seattle right now."

"Huh?"

"I told you about that story in the paper - there's some kind of gang on a killing spree in
Seattle and I want you to steer clear, okay?"

I rolled my eyes. "Dad, there's a better chance that I'll get struck by lightning than that the
one day I'm in Seattle -"

"No, that's fine, Charlie," Edward said, interrupting me. "I didn't mean Seattle. I was
thinking Portland, actually. I wouldn't have Bella in Seattle, either. Of course not."

I looked at him in disbelief, but he had Charlie's newspaper in his hands and he was reading
the front page intently.

He must have been trying to appease my father. The idea of being in danger from even the
most deadly of humans while I was with Alice or Edward was downright hilarious.

It worked. Charlie stared at Edward for one second more, and then shrugged. "Fine." He
stalked off toward the living room, in a bit of a hurry now - maybe he didn't want to miss
tip-off.

I waited till the TV was on, so that Charlie wouldn't be able to hear me.

"What -," I started to ask.

"Hold on," Edward said without looking up from the paper. His eyes stayed focused on the
page as he pushed the first application toward me across the table. "I think you can recycle
your essays for this one. Same questions."
Charlie must still be listening. I sighed and started to fill out the repetitive information: name,
address, social. . . . After a few minutes I glanced up, but Edward was now staring pensively
out the window. As I bent my head back to my work, I noticed for the first time the name of
the school.

I snorted and shoved the papers aside.

"Bella?"

"Be serious, Edward. Dartmouth ?"

Edward lifted the discarded application and laid it gently in front of me again. "I think you'd
like New Hampshire," he said. "There's a full complement of night courses for me, and the
forests are very conveniently located for the avid hiker. Plentiful wildlife." He pulled out the
crooked smile he knew I couldn't resist.

I took a deep breath through my nose.

"I'll let you pay me back, if that makes you happy," he promised. "If you want, I can charge
you interest."

"Like I could even get in without some enormous bribe. Or was that part of the loan? The
new Cullen wing of the library? Ugh. Why are we having this discussion again?"

"Will you just fill out the application, please, Bella? It won't hurt you to apply."

My jaw flexed. "You know what? I don't think I will."

I reached for the papers, planning to crumple them into a suitable shape for lobbing at the
trashcan, but they were already gone. I stared at the empty table for a moment, and then at
Edward. He didn't appear to have moved, but the application was probably already tucked
away in his jacket.

"What are you doing?" I demanded.

"I sign your name better than you do yourself. You've already written the essays."

"You're going way overboard with this, you know." I whispered on the off chance that
Charlie wasn't completely lost in his game. "I really don't need to apply anywhere else. I've
been accepted in Alaska. I can almost afford the first semester's tuition. It's as good an alibi
as any. There's no need to throw away a bunch of money, no matter whose it is."

A pained looked tightened his face. "Bella -"

"Don't start. I agree that I need to go through the motions for Charlie's sake, but we both
know I'm not going to be in any condition to go to school next fall. To be anywhere near
people."
My knowledge of those first few years as a new vampire was sketchy. Edward had never
gone into details - it wasn't his favorite subject - but I knew it wasn't pretty. Self-control was
apparently an acquired skill. Anything more than correspondence school was out of the
question.

"I thought the timing was still undecided," Edward reminded me softly. "You might enjoy a
semester or two of college. There are a lot of human experiences you've never had."

"I'll get to those afterward."

"They won't be human experiences afterward. You don't get a second chance at humanity,
Bella."

I sighed. "You've got to be reasonable about the timing, Edward. It's just too dangerous to
mess around with."

"There's no danger yet," he insisted.

I glared at him. No danger? Sure. I only had a sadistic vampire trying to avenge her mate's
death with my own, preferably through some slow and torturous method. Who was worried
about Victoria? And, oh yeah, the Volturi - the vampire royal family with their small army of
vampire warriors - who insisted that my heart stop beating one way or another in the near
future, because humans weren't allowed to know they existed. Right. No reason at all to
panic.

Even with Alice keeping watch - Edward was relying on her uncannily accurate visions of
the future to give us advance warning - it was insane to take chances.

Besides, I'd already won this argument. The date for my transformation was tentatively set
for shortly after my graduation from high school, only a handful of weeks away.

A sharp jolt of unease pierced my stomach as I realized how short the time really was. Of
course this change was necessary - and the key to what I wanted more than everything else in
the world put together - but I was deeply conscious of Charlie sitting in the other room
enjoying his game, just like every other night. And my mother, Renée, far away in sunny
Florida, still pleading with me to spend the summer on the beach with her and her new
husband. And Jacob, who, unlike my parents, would know exactly what was going on when
I disappeared to some distant school. Even if my parents didn't grow suspicious for a long
time, even if I could put off visits with excuses about travel expenses or study loads or
illnesses, Jacob would know the truth.

For a moment, the idea of Jacob's certain revulsion overshadowed every other pain.

"Bella," Edward murmured, his face twisting when he read the distress in mine. "There's no
hurry. I won't let anyone hurt you. You can take all the time you need."
"I want to hurry," I whispered, smiling weakly, trying to make a joke of it. "I want to be a
monster, too."

His teeth clenched; he spoke through them. "You have no idea what you're saying."
Abruptly, he flung the damp newspaper onto the table in between us. His finger stabbed the
headline on the front page:

DEATH TOLL ON THE RISE, POLICE FEAR GANG ACTIVITY

"What does that have to do with anything?"

"Monsters are not a joke, Bella."

I stared at the headline again, and then up to his hard expression. "A . . . a vampire is doing
this?" I whispered.

He smiled without humor. His voice was low and cold. "You'd be surprised, Bella, at how
often my kind are the source behind the horrors in your human news. It's easy to recognize,
when you know what to look for. The information here indicates a newborn vampire is loose
in Seattle. Bloodthirsty, wild, out of control. The way we all were."

I let my gaze drop to the paper again, avoiding his eyes.

"We've been monitoring the situation for a few weeks. All the signs are there - the unlikely
disappearances, always in the night, the poorly disposed-of corpses, the lack of other
evidence. . . . Yes, someone brand-new. And no one seems to be taking responsibility for the
neophyte. . . ." He took a deep breath. "Well, it's not our problem. We wouldn't even pay
attention to the situation if wasn't going on so close to home. Like I said, this happens all the
time. The existence of monsters results in monstrous consequences."

I tried not to see the names on the page, but they jumped out from the rest of the print like
they were in bold. The five people whose lives were over, whose families were mourning
now. It was different from considering murder in the abstract, reading those names. Maureen
Gardiner, Geoffrey Campbell, Grace Razi, Michelle O'Connell, Ronald Albrook. People
who'd had parents and children and friends and pets and jobs and hopes and plans and
memories and futures. . . .

"It won't be the same for me," I whispered, half to myself. "You won't let me be like that.
We'll live in Antarctica."

Edward snorted, breaking the tension. "Penguins. Lovely."

I laughed a shaky laugh and knocked the paper off the table so I wouldn't have to see those
names; it hit the linoleum with a thud. Of course Edward would consider the hunting
possibilities. He and his "vegetarian" family - all committed to protecting human life -
preferred the flavor of large predators for satisfying their dietary needs. "Alaska, then, as
planned. Only somewhere much more remote than Juneau - somewhere with grizzlies
galore."

"Better," he allowed. "There are polar bears, too. Very fierce. And the wolves get quite
large."

My mouth fell open and my breath blew out in a sharp gust.

"What's wrong?" he asked. Before I could recover, the confusion vanished and his whole
body seemed to harden. "Oh. Never mind the wolves, then, if the idea is offensive to you."
His voice was stiff, formal, his shoulders rigid.

"He was my best friend, Edward," I muttered. It stung to use the past tense. "Of course the
idea offends me."

"Please forgive my thoughtlessness," he said, still very formal. "I shouldn't have suggested
that."

"Don't worry about it." I stared at my hands, clenched into a double fist on the table.

We were both silent for a moment, and then his cool finger was under my chin, coaxing my
face up. His expression was much softer now.

"Sorry. Really."

"I know. I know it's not the same thing. I shouldn't have reacted that way. It's just that . . .
well, I was already thinking about Jacob before you came over." I hesitated. His tawny eyes
seemed to get a little bit darker whenever I said Jacob's name. My voice turned pleading in
response. "Charlie says Jake is having a hard time. He's hurting right now, and . . . it's my
fault."

"You've done nothing wrong, Bella."

I took a deep breath. "I need to make it better, Edward. I owe him that. And it's one of
Charlie's conditions, anyway -"

His face changed while I spoke, turning hard again, statue-like.

"You know it's out of the question for you to be around a werewolf unprotected, Bella. And
it would break the treaty if any of us cross over onto their land. Do you want us to start a
war?"

"Of course not!"

"Then there's really no point in discussing the matter further." He dropped his hand and
looked away, searching for a subject change. His eyes paused on something behind me, and
he smiled, though his eyes stayed wary.
"I'm glad Charlie has decided to let you out - you're sadly in need of a visit to the bookstore. I
can't believe you're reading Wuthering Heights again. Don't you know it by heart yet?"

"Not all of us have photographic memories," I said curtly.

"Photographic memory or not, I don't understand why you like it. The characters are ghastly
people who ruin each others' lives. I don't know how Heathcliff and Cathy ended up being
ranked with couples like Romeo and Juliet or Elizabeth Bennet and Mr. Darcy. It isn't a love
story, it's a hate story."

"You have some serious issues with the classics," I snapped.

"Perhaps it's because I'm not impressed by antiquity." He smiled, evidently satisfied that he'd
distracted me. "Honestly, though, whydo you read it over and over?" His eyes were vivid
with real interest now, trying - again - to unravel the convoluted workings of my mind. He
reached across the table to cradle my face in his hand. "What is it that appeals to you?"

His sincere curiosity disarmed me. "I'm not sure," I said, scrambling for coherency while his
gaze unintentionally scattered my thoughts. "I think it's something about the inevitability.
How nothing can keep them apart - not her selfishness, or his evil, or even death, in the end.
. . ."

His face was thoughtful as he considered my words. After a moment he smiled a teasing
smile. "I still think it would be a better story if either of them had one redeeming quality."

"I think that may be the point," I disagreed. "Their love is their only redeeming quality."

"I hope you have better sense than that - to fall in love with someone so . . . malignant."

"It's a bit late for me to worry about who I fall in love with," I pointed out. "But even
without the warning, I seem to have managed fairly well."

He laughed quietly. "I'm glad you think so."

"Well, I hope you're smart enough to stay away from someone so selfish. Catherine is really
the source of all the trouble, not Heathcliff."

"I'll be on my guard," he promised.

I sighed. He was so good at distractions.

I put my hand over his to hold it to my face. "I need to see Jacob."

His eyes closed. "No."

"It's truly not dangerous at all," I said, pleading again. "I used to spend all day in La Push
with the whole lot of them, and nothing ever happened."
But I made a slip; my voice faltered at the end because I realized as I was saying the words
that they were a lie. It was not true that nothing had ever happened. A brief flash of memory
- an enormous gray wolf crouched to spring, baring his dagger-like teeth at me - had my
palms sweating with an echo of remembered panic.

Edward heard my heart accelerate and nodded as if I'd acknowledged the lie aloud.
"Werewolves are unstable. Sometimes, the people near them get hurt. Sometimes, they get
killed."

I wanted to deny it, but another image slowed my rebuttal. I saw in my head the once
beautiful face of Emily Young, now marred by a trio of dark scars that dragged down the
corner of her right eye and left her mouth warped forever into a lopsided scowl.

He waited, grimly triumphant, for me to find my voice.

"You don't know them," I whispered.

"I know them better than you think, Bella. I was here the last time."

"The last time?"

"We started crossing paths with the wolves about seventy years ago. . . . We had just settled
near Hoquiam. That was before Alice and Jasper were with us. We outnumbered them, but
that wouldn't have stopped it from turning into a fight if not for Carlisle. He managed to
convince Ephraim Black that coexisting was possible, and eventually we made the truce."

Jacob's great-grandfather's name startled me.

"We thought the line had died out with Ephraim," Edward muttered; it sounded like he was
talking to himself now. "That the genetic quirk which allowed the transmutation had been
lost. . . ." He broke off and stared at me accusingly. "Your bad luck seems to get more potent
every day. Do you realize that your insatiable pull for all things deadly was strong enough to
recover a pack of mutant canines from extinction? If we could bottle your luck, we'd have a
weapon of mass destruction on our hands."

I ignored the ribbing, my attention caught by his assumption - was he serious? "ButI didn't
bring them back. Don't you know?"

"Know what?"

"My bad luck had nothing to do with it. The werewolves came back because the vampires
did."

Edward stared at me, his body motionless with surprise.

"Jacob told me that your family being here set things in motion. I thought you would already
know. . . ."
His eyes narrowed. "Is that what they think?"

"Edward, look at the facts. Seventy years ago, you came here, and the werewolves showed
up. You come back now, and the werewolves show up again. Do you think that's a
coincidence?"

He blinked and his glare relaxed. "Carlisle will be interested in that theory."

"Theory," I scoffed.

He was silent for a moment, staring out the window into the rain; I imagined he was
contemplating the fact that his family's presence was turning the locals into giant dogs.

"Interesting, but not exactly relevant," he murmured after a moment. "The situation remains
the same."

I could translate that easily enough: no werewolf friends.

I knew I must be patient with Edward. It wasn't that he was unreasonable, it was just that he
didn't understand. He had no idea how very much I owed Jacob Black - my life many times
over, and possibly my sanity, too.

I didn't like to talk about that barren time with anyone, and especially not Edward. He had
only been trying to save me when he'd left, trying to save my soul. I didn't hold him
responsible for all the stupid things I'd done in his absence, or the pain I had suffered.

He did.

So I would have to word my explanation very carefully.

I got up and walked around the table. He opened his arms for me and I sat on his lap,
nestling into his cool stone embrace. I looked at his hands while I spoke.

"Please just listen for a minute. This is so much more important than some whim to drop in
on an old friend. Jacob is in pain ." My voice distorted around the word. "I can't not try to
help him - I can't give up on him now, when he needs me. Just because he's not human all
the time. . . . Well, he was there for me when I was . . . not so human myself. You don't
know what it was like. . . ." I hesitated. Edward's arms were rigid around me; his hands were
in fists now, the tendons standing out. "If Jacob hadn't helped me . . . I'm not sure what you
would have come home to. I owe him better than this, Edward."

I looked up at his face warily. His eyes were closed, and his jaw was strained.

"I'll never forgive myself for leaving you," he whispered. "Not if I live a hundred thousand
years."

I put my hand against his cold face and waited until he sighed and opened his eyes.
"You were just trying to do the right thing. And I'm sure it would have worked with anyone
less mental than me. Besides, you're here now. That's the part that matters."

"If I'd never left, you wouldn't feel the need to go risk your life to comfort a dog ."

I flinched. I was used to Jacob and all his derogatory slurs -bloodsucker, leech, parasite . . . .
Somehow it sounded harsher in Edward's velvet voice.

"I don't know how to phrase this properly," Edward said, and his tone was bleak. "It's going
to sound cruel, I suppose. But I've come too close to losing you in the past. I know what it
feels like to think I have. I am not going to tolerate anything dangerous."

"You have to trust me on this. I'll be fine."

His face was pained again. "Please, Bella," he whispered.

I stared into his suddenly burning golden eyes. "Please what?"

"Please, for me. Please make a conscious effort to keep yourself safe. I'll do everything I can,
but I would appreciate a little help."

"I'll work on it," I murmured.

"Do you really have any idea how important you are to me? Any concept at all of how much I
love you?" He pulled me tighter against his hard chest, tucking my head under his chin.

I pressed my lips against his snow-cold neck. "I know how much I love you ," I answered.

"You compare one small tree to the entire forest."

I rolled my eyes, but he couldn't see. "Impossible."

He kissed the top of my head and sighed.

"No werewolves."

"I'm not going along with that. I have to see Jacob."

"Then I'll have to stop you."

He sounded utterly confident that this wouldn't be a problem.

I was sure he was right.

"We'll see about that," I bluffed anyway. "He's still my friend."

I could feel Jacob's note in my pocket, like it suddenly weighed ten pounds. I could hear the
words in his voice, and he seemed to be agreeing with Edward - something that would never
happen in reality.

Doesn't change anything. Sorry.

ROSALIE HESITATED IN THE DOORWAY, HER BREATHTAKING face unsure.

"Of course," I replied, my voice an octave high with surprise. "Come on in."

I sat up, sliding to the end of the sofa to make room. My stomach twisted nervously as the
one Cullen who did not like me moved silently to sit down in the open space. I tried to come
up with a reason why she would want to see me, but my mind was a blank on that point.

"Do you mind talking to me for a few minutes?" she asked. "I didn't wake you or anything,
did I?" Her eyes shifted to the stripped bed and back to my couch.

"No, I was awake. Sure, we can talk." I wondered if she could hear the alarm in my voice as
clearly as I could.

She laughed lightly, and it sounded like a chorus of bells. "He so rarely leaves you alone," she
said. "I figured I'd better make the best of this opportunity."

What did she want to say that couldn't be said in front of Edward? My hands twisted and
untwisted around the edge of the comforter.

"Please don't think I'm horribly interfering," Rosalie said, her voice gentle and almost
pleading. She folded her hands in her lap and looked down at them as she spoke. "I'm sure
I've hurt your feelings enough in the past, and I don't want to do that again."

"Don't worry about it, Rosalie. My feelings are great. What is it?"

She laughed again, sounding oddly embarrassed. "I'm going to try to tell you why I think you
should stay human - why I would stay human if I were you."

"Oh."

She smiled at the shocked tone of my voice, and then she sighed.

"Did Edward ever tell you what led to this?" she asked, gesturing to her glorious immortal
body.

I nodded slowly, suddenly somber. "He said it was close to what happened to me that time in
Port Angeles, only no one was there to save you ." I shuddered at the memory.

"Is that really all he told you?" she asked.

"Yes," I said, my voice blank with confusion. "Was there more?"

She looked up at me and smiled; it was a harsh, bitter - but still stunning - expression.

"Yes," she said. "There was more."
I waited while she stared out the window. She seemed to be trying to calm herself.

"Would you like to hear my story, Bella? It doesn't have a happy ending - but which of ours
does? If we had happy endings, we'd all be under gravestones now."

I nodded, though I was frightened by the edge in her voice.

"I lived in a different world than you do, Bella. My human world was a much simpler place.
It was nineteen thirty-three. I was eighteen, and I was beautiful. My life was perfect."

She stared out the window at the silver clouds, her expression far away.

"My parents were thoroughly middle class. My father had a stable job in a bank, something I
realize now that he was smug about - he saw his prosperity as a reward for talent and hard
work, rather than acknowledging the luck involved. I took it all for granted then; in my
home, it was as if the Great Depression was only a troublesome rumor. Of course I saw the
poor people, the ones who weren't as lucky. My father left me with the impression that they'd
brought their troubles on themselves.

"It was my mother's job to keep our house - and myself and my two younger brothers - in
spotless order. It was clear that I was both her first priority and her favorite. I didn't fully
understand at the time, but I was always vaguely aware that my parents weren't satisfied
with what they had, even if it was so much more than most. They wanted more. They had
social aspirations - social climbers, I suppose you could call them. My beauty was like a gift
to them. They saw so much more potential in it than I did.

"They weren't satisfied, but I was. I was thrilled to be me, to be Rosalie Hale. Pleased that
men's eyes watched me everywhere I went, from the year I turned twelve. Delighted that my
girlfriends sighed with envy when they touched my hair. Happy that my mother was proud of
me and that my father liked to buy me pretty dresses.

"I knew what I wanted out of life, and there didn't seem to be any way that I wouldn't get
exactly what I wanted. I wanted to be loved, to be adored. I wanted to have a huge, flowery
wedding, where everyone in town would watch me walk down the aisle on my father's arm
and think I was the most beautiful thing they'd ever seen. Admiration was like air to me,
Bella. I was silly and shallow, but I was content." She smiled, amused at her own evaluation.

"My parents' influence had been such that I also wanted the material things of life. I wanted a
big house with elegant furnishings that someone else would clean and a modern kitchen that
someone else would cook in. As I said, shallow. Young and very shallow. And I didn't see
any reason why I wouldn't get these things.

"There were a few things I wanted that were more meaningful. One thing in particular. My
very closest friend was a girl named Vera. She married young, just seventeen. She married a
man my parents would never have considered for me - a carpenter. A year later she had a son,
a beautiful little boy with dimples and curly black hair. It was the first time I'd ever felt truly
jealous of anyone else in my entire life."

She looked at me with unfathomable eyes. "It was a different time. I was the same age as
you, but I was ready for it all. I yearned for my own little baby. I wanted my own house and a
husband who would kiss me when he got home from work - just like Vera. Only I had a very
different kind of house in mind. . . ."

It was hard for me to imagine the world that Rosalie had known. Her story sounded more
like a fairy tale than history to me. With a slight shock, I realized that this was very close to
the world that Edward would have experienced when he was human, the world he had
grown up in. I wondered - while Rosalie sat silent for a moment - if my world seemed as
baffling to him as Rosalie's did to me?

Rosalie sighed, and when she spoke again her voice was different, the wistfulness gone.

"In Rochester, there was one royal family - the Kings, ironically enough. Royce King owned
the bank my father worked at, and nearly every other really profitable business in town.
That's how his son, Royce King the Second" - her mouth twisted around the name, it came
out through her teeth - "saw me the first time. He was going to take over at the bank, and so
he began overseeing the different positions. Two days later, my mother conveniently forgot
to send my father's lunch to work with him. I remember being confused when she insisted
that I wear my white organza and roll my hair up just to run over to the bank." Rosalie
laughed without humor.

"I didn't notice Royce watching me particularly. Everyone watched me. But that night the
first of the roses came. Every night of our courtship, he sent a bouquet of roses to me. My
room was always overflowing with them. It got to the point that I would smell like roses
when I left the house.

"Royce was handsome, too. He had lighter hair than I did, and pale blue eyes. He said my
eyes were like violets, and then those started showing up alongside the roses.

"My parents approved - that's putting it mildly. This was everything they'd dreamed of. And
Royce seemed to be everything I'd dreamed of. The fairy tale prince, come to make me a
princess. Everything I wanted, yet it was still no more than I expected. We were engaged
before I'd known him for two months.

"We didn't spend a great deal of time alone with each other. Royce told me he had many
responsibilities at work, and, when we were together, he liked people to look at us, to see me
on his arm. I liked that, too. There were lots of parties, dancing, and pretty dresses. When
you were a King, every door was open for you, every red carpet rolled out to greet you.

"It wasn't a long engagement. Plans went ahead for the most lavish wedding. It was going to
be everything I'd ever wanted. I was completely happy. When I called at Vera's, I no longer
felt jealous. I pictured my fair-haired children playing on the huge lawns of the Kings' estate,
and I pitied her."
Rosalie broke off suddenly, clenching her teeth together. It pulled me out of her story, and I
realized that the horror was not far off. There would be no happy ending, as she'd promised. I
wondered if this was why she had so much more bitterness in her than the rest of them -
because she'd been within reach of everything she'd wanted when her human life was cut
short.

"I was at Vera's that night," Rosalie whispered. Her face was smooth as marble, and as hard.
"Her little Henry really was adorable, all smiles and dimples - he was just sitting up on his
own. Vera walked me to the door as I was leaving, her baby in her arms and her husband at
her side, his arm around her waist. He kissed her on the cheek when he thought I wasn't
looking. That bothered me. When Royce kissed me, it wasn't quite the same - not so sweet
somehow. . . . I shoved that thought aside. Royce was my prince. Someday, I would be
queen."

It was hard to tell in the moonlight, but it looked like her bone white face got paler.

"It was dark in the streets, the lamps already on. I hadn't realized how late it was." She
continued to whisper almost inaudibly. "It was cold, too. Very cold for late April. The
wedding was only a week away, and I was worrying about the weather as I hurried home - I
can remember that clearly. I remember every detail about that night. I clung to it so hard . . .
in the beginning. I thought of nothing else. And so I remember this, when so many pleasant
memories have faded away completely. . . ."

She sighed, and began whispering again. "Yes, I was worrying about the weather. . . . I didn't
want to have to move the wedding indoors. . . .

"I was a few streets from my house when I heard them. A cluster of men under a broken
streetlamp, laughing too loud. Drunk. I wished I'd called my father to escort me home, but
the way was so short, it seemed silly. And then he called my name.

"'Rose!' he yelled, and the others laughed stupidly.

"I hadn't realized the drunks were so well dressed. It was Royce and some of his friends, sons
of other rich men.

"'Here's my Rose!' Royce shouted, laughing with them, sounding just as stupid. 'You're late.
We're cold, you've kept us waiting so long.'"

"I'd never seen him drink before. A toast, now and then, at a party. He'd told me he didn't
like champagne. I hadn't realized that he preferred something much stronger.

"He had a new friend - the friend of a friend, come up from Atlanta.

"'What did I tell you, John,' Royce crowed, grabbing my arm and pulling me closer. 'Isn't she
lovelier than all your Georgia peaches?'
"The man named John was dark-haired and suntanned. He looked me over like I was a horse
he was buying.

"'It's hard to tell,' he drawled slowly. 'She's all covered up.'

"They laughed, Royce like the rest.

"Suddenly, Royce ripped my jacket from my shoulders - it was a gift from him - popping the
brass buttons off. They scattered all over the street.

"'Show him what you look like, Rose!' He laughed again and then he tore my hat out of my
hair. The pins wrenched my hair from the roots, and I cried out in pain. They seemed to enjoy
that - the sound of my pain. . . ."

Rosalie looked at me suddenly, as if she'd forgotten I was there. I was sure my face was as
white as hers. Unless it was green.

"I won't make you listen to the rest," she said quietly. "They left me in the street, still
laughing as they stumbled away. They thought I was dead. They were teasing Royce that he
would have to find a new bride. He laughed and said he'd have to learn some patience first.

"I waited in the road to die. It was cold, though there was so much pain that I was surprised
it bothered me. It started to snow, and I wondered why I wasn't dying. I was impatient for
death to come, to end the pain. It was taking so long. . . .

"Carlisle found me then. He'd smelled the blood, and come to investigate. I remember being
vaguely irritated as he worked over me, trying to save my life. I'd never liked Dr. Cullen or
his wife and her brother - as Edward pretended to be then. It had upset me that they were all
more beautiful than I was, especially that the men were. But they didn't mingle in society, so
I'd only seen them once or twice.

"I thought I'd died when he pulled me from the ground and ran with me - because of the
speed - it felt like I was flying. I remembered being horrified that the pain didn't stop. . . .

"Then I was in a bright room, and it was warm. I was slipping away, and I was grateful as the
pain began to dull. But suddenly something sharp was cutting me, my throat, my wrists, my
ankles. I screamed in shock, thinking he'd brought me there to hurt me more. Then fire
started burning through me, and I didn't care about anything else. I begged him to kill me.
When Esme and Edward returned home, I begged them to kill me, too. Carlisle sat with me.
He held my hand and said that he was so sorry, promising that it would end. He told me
everything, and sometimes I listened. He told me what he was, what I was becoming. I didn't
believe him. He apologized each time I screamed.

"Edward wasn't happy. I remember hearing them discuss me. I stopped screaming sometimes.
It did no good to scream.
"'What were you thinking, Carlisle?' Edward said. 'Rosalie Hale?'" Rosalie imitated Edward's
irritated tone to perfection. "I didn't like the way he said my name, like there was something
wrong with me.

"'I couldn't just let her die,' Carlisle said quietly. 'It was too much - too horrible, too much
waste.'

"'I know,' Edward said, and I thought he sounded dismissive. It angered me. I didn't know
then that he really could see exactly what Carlisle had seen.

"'It was too much waste. I couldn't leave her,' Carlisle repeated in a whisper.

"'Of course you couldn't,' Esme agreed.

"'People die all the time,' Edward reminded him in a hard voice. 'Don't you think she's just a
little recognizable, though? The Kings will have to put up a huge search - not that anyone
suspects the fiend,' he growled.

"It pleased me that they seemed to know that Royce was guilty.

"I didn't realize that it was almost over - that I was getting stronger and that was why I was
able to concentrate on what they were saying. The pain was beginning to fade from my
fingertips.

"'What are we going to do with her?' Edward said disgustedly - or that's how it sounded to
me, at least.

"Carlisle sighed. 'That's up to her, of course. She may want to go her own way.'

"I'd believed enough of what he'd told me that his words terrified me. I knew that my life
was ended, and there was no going back for me. I couldn't stand the thought of being alone. .
..

"The pain finally ended and they explained to me again what I was. This time I believed. I
felt the thirst, my hard skin; I saw my brilliant red eyes.

"Shallow as I was, I felt better when I saw my reflection in the mirror the first time. Despite
the eyes, I was the most beautiful thing I'd ever seen." She laughed at herself for a moment.
"It took some time before I began to blame the beauty for what had happened to me - for me
to see the curse of it. To wish that I had been . . . well, not ugly, but normal. Like Vera. So I
could have been allowed to marry someone who loved me, and have pretty babies. That's
what I'd really wanted, all along. It still doesn't seem like too much to have asked for."

She was thoughtful for a moment, and I wondered if she'd forgotten my presence again. But
then she smiled at me, her expression suddenly triumphant.

"You know, my record is almost as clean as Carlisle's," she told me. "Better than Esme. A
thousand times better than Edward. I've never tasted human blood," she announced proudly.

She understood my puzzled expression as I wondered why her record was only almost as
clean.

"I did murder five humans," she told me in a complacent tone. "If you can really call
them human . But I was very careful not to spill their blood - I knew I wouldn't be able to
resist that, and I didn't want any part of themin me, you see.

"I saved Royce for last. I hoped that he would hear of his friends' deaths and understand,
know what was coming for him. I hoped the fear would make the end worse for him. I think
it worked. He was hiding inside a windowless room behind a door as thick as a bank vault's,
guarded outside by armed men, when I caught up with him. Oops - seven murders," she
corrected herself. "I forgot about his guards. They only took a second."

"I was overly theatrical. It was kind of childish, really. I wore a wedding dress I'd stolen for
the occasion. He screamed when he saw me. He screamed a lot that night. Saving him for
last was a good idea - it made it easier for me to control myself, to make it slower -"

She broke off suddenly, and she glanced down at me. "I'm sorry," she said in a chagrined
voice. "I'm frightening you, aren't I?"

"I'm fine," I lied.

"I got carried away."

"Don't worry about it."

"I'm surprised Edward didn't tell you more about it."

"He doesn't like to tell other people's stories - he feels like he's betraying confidences,
because he hears so much more than just the parts they mean for him to hear."

She smiled and shook her head. "I probably ought to give him more credit. He's really quite
decent, isn't he?"

"I think so."

"I can tell." Then she sighed. "I haven't been fair to you, either, Bella. Did he tell you why?
Or was that too confidential?"

"He said it was because I was human. He said it was harder for you to have someone on the
outside who knew."

Rosalie's musical laughter interrupted me. "Now I really feel guilty. He's been much, much
kinder to me than I deserve." She seemed warmer as she laughed, like she'd let down some
guard that had never been absent in my presence before. "What a liar that boy is." She
laughed again.

"He was lying?" I asked, suddenly wary.

"Well, that's probably putting it too strongly. He just didn't tell you the whole story. What he
told you was true, even truer now than it was before. However, at the time . . ." She broke
off, chuckling nervously. "It's embarrassing. You see, at first, I was mostly jealous because he
wanted you and not me."

Her words sent a thrill of fear through me. Sitting there in the silver light, she was more
beautiful than anything else I could imagine. I could not compete with Rosalie.

"But you love Emmett . . . ," I mumbled.

She shook her head back and forth, amused. "I don't want Edward that way, Bella. I never
did - I love him as a brother, but he's irritated me from the first moment I heard him speak.
You have to understand, though . . . I was so used to people wanting me . And Edward
wasn't the least bit interested. It frustrated me, even offended me in the beginning. But he
never wanted anyone, so it didn't bother me long. Even when we first met Tanya's clan in
Denali - all those females! - Edward never showed the slightest preference. And then he met
you." She looked at me with confused eyes. I was only half paying attention. I was thinking
about Edward and Tanya andall those females, and my lips pressed together in a hard line.

"Not that you aren't pretty, Bella," she said, misreading my expression. "But it just meant
that he found you more attractive than me. I'm vain enough that I minded."

"But you said 'at first.' That doesn't still . . . bother you, does it? I mean, we both know
you're the most beautiful person on the planet."

I laughed at having to say the words - it was so obvious. How odd that Rosalie should need
such reassurances.

Rosalie laughed, too. "Thanks, Bella. And no, it doesn't really bother me anymore. Edward
has always been a little strange." She laughed again.

"But you still don't like me," I whispered.

Her smile faded. "I'm sorry about that."

We sat in silence for a moment, and she didn't seem inclined to go on.

"Would you tell me why? Did I do something . . . ?" Was she angry that I'd put her family -
her Emmett - in danger? Time and time again. James, and now Victoria . . .

"No, you haven't done anything," she murmured. "Not yet."

I stared at her, perplexed.
"Don't you see, Bella?" Her voice was suddenly more passionate than before, even while
she'd told her unhappy story. "You already have everything . You have a whole life ahead of
you - everything I want. And you're going to just throw it away . Can't you see that I'd trade
everything I have to be you? You have the choice that I didn't have, and you're
choosing wrong !"

I flinched back from her fierce expression. I realized my mouth had fallen open and I snapped
it shut.

She stared at me for a long moment and, slowly, the fervor in her eyes dimmed. Abruptly, she
was abashed.

"And I was so sure that I could do this calmly." She shook her head, seeming a little dazed by
the flood of emotion. "It's just that it's harder now than it was then, when it was no more
than vanity."

She stared at the moon in silence. It was a few moments before I was brave enough to break
into her reverie.

"Would you like me better if I chose to stay human?"

She turned back to me, her lips twitching into a hint of a smile. "Maybe."

"You did get some of your happy ending, though," I reminded her. "You got Emmett."

"I got half." She grinned. "You know that I saved Emmett from a bear that was mauling him,
and carried him home to Carlisle. But can you guess why I stopped the bear from eating
him?"

I shook my head.

"With the dark curls . . . the dimples that showed even while he was grimacing in pain . . .
the strange innocence that seemed so out of place on a grown man's face . . . he reminded me
of Vera's little Henry. I didn't want him to die - so much that, even though I hated this life, I
was selfish enough to ask Carlisle to change him for me.

"I got luckier than I deserved. Emmett is everything I would have asked for if I'd known
myself well enough to know what to ask for. He's exactly the kind of person someone like
me needs. And, oddly enough, he needs me, too. That part worked out better than I could
have hoped. But there will never be more than the two of us. And I'll never sit on a porch
somewhere, with him gray-haired by my side, surrounded by our grandchildren."

Her smile was kind now. "That sounds quite bizarre to you, doesn't it? In some ways, you are
much more mature than I was at eighteen. But in other ways . . . there are many things
you've probably never thought about seriously. You're too young to know what you'll want
in ten years, fifteen years - and too young to give it all up without thinking it through. You
don't want to be rash about permanent things, Bella." She patted my head, but the gesture
didn't feel condescending.

I sighed.

"Just think about it a little. Once it's done, it can't be undone. Esme's made do with us as
substitutes . . . and Alice doesn't remember anything human so she can't miss it. . . . You will
remember, though. It's a lot to give up."

But more to get in return,I didn't say aloud. "Thanks, Rosalie. It's nice to understand . . . to
know you better."

"I apologize for being such a monster." She grinned. "I'll try to behave myself from now on."

I grinned back at her.

We weren't friends yet, but I was pretty sure she wouldn't always hate me so much.

"I'll let you sleep now." Rosalie's eyes flickered to the bed, and her lips twitched. "I know
you're frustrated that he's keeping you locked up like this, but don't give him too bad a time
when he gets back. He loves you more than you know. It terrifies him to be away from you."
She got up silently and ghosted to the door. "Goodnight, Bella," she whispered as she shut it
behind herself.

"Goodnight, Rosalie," I murmured a second too late.

It took me a long time to fall asleep after that.

When I did sleep, I had a nightmare. I was crawling across the dark, cold stones of an
unfamiliar street, under lightly falling snow, leaving a trail of blood smeared behind me. A
shadowy angel in a long white dress watched my progress with resentful eyes.

The next morning, Alice drove me to school while I stared grumpily out the windshield. I
was feeling sleep-deprived, and it made the irritation of my imprisonment that much stronger.

"Tonight we'll go out to Olympia or something," she promised. "That would be fun, right?"

"Why don't you just lock me in the basement," I suggested, "and forget the sugar coating?"

Alice frowned. "He's going to take the Porsche back. I'm not doing a very good job. You're
supposed to be having fun."

"It's not your fault," I muttered. I couldn't believe I actually felt guilty. "I'll see you at lunch."

I trudged off to English. Without Edward, the day was guaranteed to be unbearable. I sulked
through my first class, well aware that my attitude wasn't helping anything.

When the bell rang, I got up without much enthusiasm. Mike was there at the door, holding
it open for me.

"Edward hiking this weekend?" he asked sociably as we walked out into the light rain.

"Yeah."

"You want to do something tonight?"

How could he still sound hopeful?

"Can't. I've got a slumber party," I grumbled. He gave me a strange look as he processed my
mood.

"Who are you -"

Mike's question was cut short as a loud, growling roar erupted from behind us in the parking
lot. Everyone on the sidewalk turned to look, staring in disbelief as the noisy black
motorcycle screeched to a stop on the edge of the concrete, the engine still snarling.

Jacob waved to me urgently.

"Run, Bella!" he yelled over the engine's roar.

I was frozen for a second before I understood.

I looked at Mike quickly. I knew I only had seconds.

How far would Alice go to restrain me in public?

"I got really sick and went home, okay?" I said to Mike, my voice filled with sudden
excitement.

"Fine," he muttered.

I pecked Mike swiftly on the cheek. "Thanks, Mike. I owe you one!" I called as I sprinted
away.

Jacob revved his engine, grinning. I jumped on the back of his seat, wrapping my arms tightly
around his waist.

I caught sight of Alice, frozen at the edge of the cafeteria, her eyes sparking with fury, her lip
curled back over her teeth.

I shot her one pleading glance.

Then we were racing across the blacktop so fast that my stomach got lost somewhere behind
me.

"Hold on," Jacob shouted.
I hid my face in his back as he sped down the highway. I knew he would slow down when
we hit the Quileute border. I just had to hold on till then. I prayed silently and fervently that
Alice wouldn't follow, and that Charlie wouldn't happen to see me. . . .

It was obvious when we had reached the safe zone. The bike slowed, and Jacob straightened
up and howled with laughter. I opened my eyes.

"We made it," he shouted. "Not bad for a prison break, eh?"

"Good thinking, Jake."

"I remembered what you said about the psychic leech not being about to predict whatI'm
going to do. I'm glad you didn't think of this - she wouldn't have let you go to school."

"That's why I didn't consider it."

He laughed triumphantly. "What do you want to do today?"

"Anything!" I laughed back. It felt great to be free.

"YOU CAN'T BE SERIOUS," I SAID WEDNESDAY AFTERnoon. "You've completely
lost your mind!"

"Say whatever you like about me," Alice answered. "The party is still on."

I stared at her, my eyes so wide with disbelief it felt like they might fall out and land on my
lunch tray.

"Oh, calm down, Bella! There's no reason not to go through with it. Besides, the invitations
are already sent."

"But . . . the . . . you . . . I . . . insane!" I spluttered.

"You've already bought my present," she reminded me. "You don't have to do anything but
show up."

I made an effort to calm myself. "With everything that is going on right now, a party is hardly
appropriate."

"Graduation is what's going on right now, and a party is so appropriate it's almost passé."

"Alice!"

She sighed, and tried to be serious. "There are a few things we need to get in order now, and
that's going to take a little time. As long as we're sitting here waiting, we might as well
commemorate the good stuff. You're only going to graduate from high school - for the first
time - once. You don't get to be human again, Bella. This is a once-in-a-lifetime shot."

Edward, silent through our little argument, flashed her a warning look. She stuck out her
tongue at him. She was right - her soft voice would never carry over the babble of the
cafeteria. And no one would understand the meaning behind her words in any case.

"What few things do we need to get in order?" I asked, refusing to be sidetracked.

Edward answered in a low voice. "Jasper thinks we could use some help. Tanya's family isn't
the only choice we have. Carlisle's trying to track down a few old friends, and Jasper is
looking up Peter and Charlotte. He's considering talking to Maria . . . but no one really wants
to involve the southerners."

Alice shuddered delicately.

"It shouldn't be too hard to convince them to help," he continued. "Nobody wants a visit
from Italy."

"But these friends - they're not going to be . . .vegetarians, right?" I protested, using the
Cullens' tongue-in-cheek nickname for themselves.

"No," Edward answered, suddenly expressionless.

"Here? In Forks?"

"They're friends," Alice reassured me. "Everything's going to be fine. Don't worry. And then,
Jasper has to teach us a few courses on newborn elimination. . . ."

Edward's eyes brightened at that, and a brief smile flashed across his face. My stomach
suddenly felt like it was full of sharp little splinters of ice.

"When are you going?" I asked in a hollow voice. I couldn't stand this - the idea that
someone might not come back. What if it was Emmett, so brave and thoughtless that he was
never the least bit cautious? Or Esme, so sweet and motherly that I couldn't even imagine her
in a fight? Or Alice, so tiny, so fragile-looking? Or . . . but I couldn't even think the name,
consider the possibility.

"A week," Edward said casually. "That ought to give us enough time."

The icy splinters twisted uncomfortably in my stomach. I was suddenly nauseated.

"You look kind of green, Bella," Alice commented.

Edward put his arm around me and pulled me tightly against his side. "It's going to be fine,
Bella. Trust me."

Sure,I thought to myself. Trust him. He wasn't the one who was going to have to sit behind
and wonder whether or not the core of his existence was going to come home.

And then it occurred to me. Maybe I didn't need to sit behind. A week was more than
enough time.

"You're looking for help," I said slowly.

"Yes." Alice's head cocked to the side as she processed the change in my tone.

I looked only at her as I answered. My voice was just slightly louder than a whisper. "I could
help."

Edward's body was suddenly rigid, his arm too tight around me. He exhaled, and the sound
was a hiss.

But it was Alice, still calm, who answered. "That really wouldn't be helpful. "

"Why not?" I argued; I could hear the desperation in my voice. "Eight is better than seven.
There's more than enough time."
"There's not enough time to make you helpful, Bella," she disagreed coolly. "Do you
remember how Jasper described the young ones? You'd be no good in a fight. You wouldn't
be able to control your instincts, and that would make you an easy target. And then Edward
would get hurt trying to protect you." She folded her arms across her chest, pleased with her
unassailable logic.

And I knew she was right, when she put it like that. I slumped in my seat, my sudden hope
defeated. Beside me, Edward relaxed.

He whispered the reminder in my ear. "Not because you're afraid."

"Oh," Alice said, and a blank look crossed her face. Then her expression became surly. "I hate
last-minute cancellations. So that puts the party attendance list down to sixty-five. . . ."

"Sixty-five!"My eyes bulged again. I didn't have that many friends. Did I even know that
many people?

"Who canceled?" Edward wondered, ignoring me.

"Renée."

"What?" I gasped.

"She was going to surprise you for your graduation, but something went wrong. You'll have
a message when you get home."

For a moment, I just let myself enjoy the relief. Whatever it was that went wrong for my
mother, I was eternally grateful to it. If she had come to Forks now . . . I didn't want to think
about it. My head would explode.

The message light was flashing when I got home. My feeling of relief flared again as I
listened to my mother describe Phil's accident on the ball field - while demonstrating a slide,
he'd tangled up with the catcher and broken his thigh bone; he was entirely dependent on
her, and there was no way she could leave him. My mom was still apologizing when the
message cut off.

"Well, that's one," I sighed.

"One what?" Edward asked.

"One person I don't have to worry about getting killed this week."

He rolled his eyes.

"Why won't you and Alice take this seriously?" I demanded. "This is serious. "

He smiled. "Confidence."
"Wonderful," I grumbled. I picked up the phone and dialed Renée's number. I knew it would
be a long conversation, but I also knew that I wouldn't have to contribute much.

I just listened, and reassured her every time I could get a word in: I wasn't disappointed, I
wasn't mad, I wasn't hurt. She should concentrate on helping Phil get better. I passed on my
"get well soon" to Phil, and promised to call her with every single detail from Forks High's
generic graduation. Finally, I had to use my desperate need to study for finals to get off the
phone.

Edward's patience was endless. He waited politely through the whole conversation, just
playing with my hair and smiling whenever I looked up. It was probably superficial to notice
such things while I had so many more important things to think about, but his smile still
knocked the breath out of me. He was so beautiful that it made it hard sometimes to think
about anything else, hard to concentrate on Phil's troubles or Renée's apologies or hostile
vampire armies. I was only human.

As soon as I hung up, I stretched onto my tiptoes to kiss him. He put his hands around my
waist and lifted me onto the kitchen counter, so I wouldn't have to reach as far. That worked
for me. I locked my arms around his neck and melted against his cold chest.

Too soon, as usual, he pulled away.

I felt my face slip into a pout. He laughed at my expression as he extricated himself from my
arms and legs. He leaned against the counter next to me and put one arm lightly around my
shoulders.

"I know you think that I have some kind of perfect, unyielding self-control, but that's not
actually the case."

"I wish," I sighed.

And he sighed, too.

"After school tomorrow," he said, changing the subject, "I'm going hunting with Carlisle,
Esme, and Rosalie. Just for a few hours - we'll stay close. Alice, Jasper, and Emmett should
be able to keep you safe."

"Ugh," I grumbled. Tomorrow was the first day of finals, and it was only a half-day. I had
Calculus and History - the only two challenges in my line-up - so I'd have almost the whole
day without him, and nothing to do but worry. "I hate being babysat."

"It's temporary," he promised.

"Jasper will be bored. Emmett will make fun of me."

"They'll be on their best behavior."
"Right," I grumbled.

And then it occurred to me that I did have one option besides babysitters. "You know . . . I
haven't been to La Push since the bonfire."

I watched his face carefully for any change in expression. His eyes tightened the tiniest bit.

"I'd be safe enough there," I reminded him.

He thought about it for a few seconds. "You're probably right."

His face was calm, but just a little too smooth. I almost asked if he'd rather I stayed here, but
then I thought of the ribbing Emmett would no doubt dish out, and I changed the subject.
"Are you thirsty already?" I asked, reaching up to stroke the light shadow beneath his eye.
His irises were still a deep gold.

"Not really." He seemed reluctant to answer, and that surprised me. I waited for an
explanation.

"We want to be as strong as possible," he explained, still reluctant. "We'll probably hunt
again on the way, looking for big game."

"That makes you stronger?"

He searched my face for something, but there was nothing to find but curiosity.

"Yes," he finally said. "Human blood makes us the strongest, though only fractionally.
Jasper's been thinking about cheating - adverse as he is to the idea, he's nothing if not
practical - but he won't suggest it. He knows what Carlisle will say."

"Would that help?" I asked quietly.

"It doesn't matter. We aren't going to change who we are."

I frowned. If something helped even the odds . . . and then I shuddered, realizing I was
willing to have a stranger die to protect him. I was horrified at myself, but not entirely able to
deny it, either.

He changed the subject again. "That's why they're so strong, of course. The newborns are full
of human blood - their own blood, reacting to the change. It lingers in the tissues and
strengthens them. Their bodies use it up slowly, like Jasper said, the strength starting to
wane after about a year."

"How strong willI be?"

He grinned. "Stronger than I am."

"Stronger than Emmett?"
The grin got bigger. "Yes. Do me a favor and challenge him to an arm-wrestling match. It
would be a good experience for him."

I laughed. It sounded so ridiculous.

Then I sighed and hopped down from the counter, because I really couldn't put it off any
longer. I had to cram, and cram hard. Luckily I had Edward's help, and Edward was an
excellent tutor - since he knew absolutely everything. I figured my biggest problem would be
just focusing on the tests. If I didn't watch myself, I might end up writing my History essay
on the vampire wars of the South.

I took a break to call Jacob, and Edward seemed just as comfortable as he had when I was on
the phone with Renée. He played with my hair again.

Though it was the middle of the afternoon, my call woke Jacob up, and he was grouchy at
first. He cheered right up when I asked if I could visit the next day. The Quileute school was
already out for the summer, so he told me to come over as early as I could. I was pleased to
have an option besides being babysat. There was a tiny bit more dignity in spending the day
with Jacob.

Some of that dignity was lost when Edward insisted again on delivering me to the border line
like a child being exchanged by custodial guardians.

"So how do you feel you did on your exams?" Edward asked on the way, making small talk.

"History was easy, but I don't know about the Calculus. It seemed like it was making sense,
so that probably means I failed."

He laughed. "I'm sure you did fine. Or, if you're really worried, I could bribe Mr. Varner to
give you an A."

"Er, thanks, but no thanks."

He laughed again, but suddenly stopped when we turned the last bend and saw the red car
waiting. He frowned in concentration, and then, as he parked the car, he sighed.

"What's wrong?" I asked, my hand on the door.

He shook his head. "Nothing." His eyes were narrowed as he stared through the windshield
toward the other car. I'd seen that look before.

"You're not listening to Jacob, are you?" I accused.

"It's not easy to ignore someone when he's shouting."

"Oh." I thought about that for a second. "What's he shouting?" I whispered.
"I'm absolutely certain he'll mention it himself," Edward said in a wry tone.

I would have pressed the issue, but then Jacob honked his horn - two quick impatient honks.

"That's impolite," Edward growled.

"That's Jacob," I sighed, and I hurried out before Jacob did something to really set Edward's
teeth on edge.

I waved to Edward before I got into the Rabbit and, from that distance, it looked like he was
truly upset about the honking thing . . . or whatever Jacob was thinking about. But my eyes
were weak and made mistakes all the time.

I wanted Edward to come to me. I wanted to make both of them get out of their cars and
shake hands and be friends - be Edward and Jacob rather than vampire and werewolf. It was as
if I had those two stubborn magnets in my hands again, and I was holding them together,
trying to force nature to reverse herself. . . .

I sighed, and climbed in Jacob's car.

"Hey, Bells." Jake's tone was cheerful, but his voice dragged. I examined his face as he
started down the road, driving a little faster than I did, but slower than Edward, on his way
back to La Push.

Jacob looked different, maybe even sick. His eyelids drooped and his face was drawn. His
shaggy hair stuck out in random directions; it was almost to his chin in some places.

"Are you all right, Jake?"

"Just tired," he managed to get out before he was overcome by a massive yawn. When he
finished, he asked, "What do you want to do today?"

I eyed him for a moment. "Let's just hang out at your place for now," I suggested. He didn't
look like he was up for much more than that. "We can ride our bikes later."

"Sure, sure," he said, yawning again.

Jacob's house was vacant, and that felt strange. I realized I thought of Billy as a nearly
permanent fixture there.

"Where's your dad?"

"Over at the Clearwaters'. He's been hanging out there a lot since Harry died. Sue gets
lonely."

Jacob sat down on the old couch that was no bigger than a loveseat and squished himself to
the side to make room for me.
"Oh. That's nice. Poor Sue."

"Yeah . . . she's having some trouble. . . ." He hesitated. "With her kids."

"Sure, it's got to be hard on Seth and Leah, losing their dad. . . ."

"Uh-huh," he agreed, lost in thought. He picked up the remote and flipped on the TV
without seeming to think about it. He yawned.

"What's with you, Jake? You're like a zombie."

"I got about two hours of sleep last night, and four the night before," he told me. He
stretched his long arms slowly, and I could hear the joints crack as he flexed. He settled his
left arm along the back of the sofa behind me, and slumped back to rest his head against the
wall. "I'm exhausted."

"Why aren't you sleeping?" I asked.

He made a face. "Sam's being difficult. He doesn't trust your bloodsuckers. I've been running
double shifts for two weeks and nobody's touched me yet, but he still doesn't buy it. So I'm
on my own for now."

"Double shifts? Is this because you're trying to watch out forme? Jake, that's wrong! You
need to sleep. I'll be fine."

"It's no big deal." His eyes were abruptly more alert. "Hey, did you ever find out who was in
your room? Is there anything new?"

I ignored the second question. "No, we didn't find anything out about my, um, visitor."

"Then I'll be around," he said as his eyes slid closed.

"Jake . . . ," I started to whine.

"Hey, it's the least I can do - I offered eternal servitude, remember. I'm your slave for life."

"I don't want a slave!"

His eyes didn't open. "What do you want, Bella?"

"I want my friend Jacob - and I don't want him half-dead, hurting himself in some misguided
attempt -"

He cut me off. "Look at it this way - I'm hoping I can track down a vampire I'm allowed to
kill, okay?"

I didn't answer. He looked at me then, peeking at my reaction.
"Kidding, Bella."

I stared at the TV.

"So, any special plans next week? You're graduating. Wow. That's big." His voice turned
flat, and his face, already drawn, looked downright haggard as his eyes closed again - not in
exhaustion this time, but in denial. I realized that graduation still had a horrible significance
for him, though my intentions were now disrupted.

"No special plans," I said carefully, hoping he would hear the reassurance in my words
without a more detailed explanation. I didn't want to get into it now. For one thing, he didn't
look up for any difficult conversations. For another, I knew he would read too much into my
qualms. "Well, I do have to go to a graduation party. Mine." I made a disgusted sound.
"Alice loves parties, and she's invited the whole town to her place the night of. It's going to
be horrible."

His eyes opened as I spoke, and a relieved smile made his face look less worn. "I didn't get an
invitation. I'm hurt," he teased.

"Consider yourself invited. It's supposedly my party, so I should be able to ask who I want."

"Thanks," he said sarcastically, his eyes slipping closed once more.

"I wish you would come," I said without any hope. "It would be more fun. For me, I mean."

"Sure, sure," he mumbled. "That would be very . . . wise . . ." His voice trailed off.

A few seconds later, he was snoring.

Poor Jacob. I studied his dreaming face, and liked what I saw. While he slept, every trace of
defensiveness and bitterness disappeared and suddenly he was the boy who had been my very
best friend before all the werewolf nonsense had gotten in the way. He looked so much
younger. He looked like my Jacob.

I nestled into the couch to wait out his nap, hoping he would sleep for a while and make up
some of what he'd lost. I flipped through channels, but there wasn't much on. I settled for a
cooking show, knowing, as I watched, that I'd never put that much effort into Charlie's
dinner. Jacob continued to snore, getting louder. I turned up the TV.

I was strangely relaxed, almost sleepy, too. This house felt safer than my own, probably
because no one had ever come looking for me here. I curled up on the sofa and thought about
taking a nap myself. Maybe I would have, but Jacob's snoring was impossible to tune out.
So, instead of sleeping, I let my mind wander.

Finals were done, and most of them had been a cakewalk. Calculus, the one exception, was
behind me, pass or fail. My high school education was over. And I didn't really know how I
felt about that. I couldn't look at it objectively, tied up as it was with my human life being
over.

I wondered how long Edward planned to use this "not because you're scared" excuse. I was
going to have to put my foot down sometime.

If I were thinking practically, I knew it made more sense to ask Carlisle to change me the
second I made it through the graduation line. Forks was becoming nearly as dangerous as a
war zone. No, Forks was a war zone. Not to mention . . . it would be a good excuse to miss
the graduation party. I smiled to myself as I thought of that most trivial of reasons for
changing. Silly . . . yet still compelling.

But Edward was right - I wasn't quite ready yet.

And I didn't want to be practical. I wanted Edward to be the one. It wasn't a rational desire. I
was sure that - about two seconds after someone actually bit me and the venom started
burning through my veins - I really wouldn't care anymore who had done it. So it shouldn't
make a difference.

It was hard to define, even to myself, why it mattered. There was just something about him
being the one to make the choice - to want to keep me enough that he wouldn't just allow
me to be changed, he would act to keep me. It was childish, but I liked the idea that his lips
would be the last good thing I would feel. Even more embarrassingly, something I would
never say aloud, I wanted his venom to poison my system. It would make me belong to him in
a tangible, quantifiable way.

But I knew he was going to stick to his marriage scheme like glue - because a delay was
what he was clearly after and it was working so far. I tried to imagine telling my parents that
I was getting married this summer. Telling Angela and Ben and Mike. I couldn't. I couldn't
think of the words to say. It would be easier to tell them I was becoming a vampire. And I
was sure that at least my mother - were I to tell her every detail of the truth - would be more
strenuously opposed to me getting married than to me a becoming vampire. I grimaced to
myself as I imagined her horrified expression.

Then, for just a second, I saw that same odd vision of Edward and me on a porch swing,
wearing clothes from another kind of world. A world where it would surprise no one if I
wore his ring on my finger. A simpler place, where love was defined in simpler ways. One
plus one equals two. . . .

Jacob snorted and rolled to his side. His arm swung off the back of the couch and pinned me
against his body.

Holy crow, but he was heavy! And hot. It was sweltering after just a few seconds.

I tried to slide out from under his arm without waking him, but I had to shove a little bit, and
when his arm fell off me, his eyes snapped open. He jumped to his feet, looking around
anxiously.
"What? What?" he asked, disoriented.

"It's just me, Jake. Sorry I woke you."

He turned to look at me, blinking and confused. "Bella?"

"Hey, sleepy."

"Oh, man! Did I fall asleep? I'm sorry! How long was I out?"

"A few Emerils. I lost count."

He flopped back on the couch next to me. "Wow. Sorry about that, really."

I patted his hair, trying to smooth the wild disarray. "Don't feel bad. I'm glad you got some
sleep."

He yawned and stretched. "I'm useless these days. No wonder Billy's always gone. I'm so
boring."

"You're fine," I assured him.

"Ugh, let's go outside. I need to walk around or I'll pass out again."

"Jake, go back to sleep. I'm good. I'll call Edward to come pick me up." I patted my pockets
as I spoke, and realized they were empty. "Shoot, I'll have to borrow your phone. I think I
must have left his in the car." I started to unfold myself.

"No!" Jacob insisted, grabbing my hand. "No, stay. You hardly ever make it down. I can't
believe I wasted all this time."

He pulled me off the couch as he spoke, and then led the way outside, ducking his head as he
passed under the doorframe. It had gotten much cooler while Jacob slept; the air was
unseasonably cold - there must be a storm on the way. It felt like February, not May.

The wintry air seemed to make Jacob more alert. He paced back and forth in front of the
house for a minute, dragging me along with him.

"I'm an idiot," he muttered to himself.

"What's the matter, Jake? So you fell asleep." I shrugged.

"I wanted to talk to you. I can't believe this."

"Talk to me now," I said.

Jacob met my eyes for a second, and then looked away quickly toward the trees. It almost
looked like he was blushing, but it was hard to tell with his dark skin.
I suddenly remembered what Edward had said when he dropped me off - that Jacob would
tell me whatever he was shouting in his head. I started gnawing on my lip.

"Look," Jacob said. "I was planning to do this a little bit differently." He laughed, and it
sounded like he was laughing at himself. "Smoother," he added. "I was going to work up to
it, but" - and he looked at the clouds, dimmer as the afternoon progressed - "I'm out of time
to work."

He laughed again, nervous. We were still pacing slowly.

"What are you talking about?" I demanded.

He took a deep breath. "I want to tell you something. And you already know it . . . but I
think I should say it out loud anyway. Just so there's never any confusion on the subject."

I planted my feet, and he came to a stop. I took my hand away and folded my arms across my
chest. I was suddenly sure that I didn't want to know what he was building up to.

Jacob's eyebrows pulled down, throwing his deep-set eyes into shadow. They were pitch
black as they bored into mine.

"I'm in love with you, Bella," Jacob said in a strong, sure voice. "Bella, I love you. And I
want you to pick me instead of him. I know you don't feel that way, but I need the truth out
there so that you know your options. I wouldn't want a miscommunication to stand in our
way."

EDWARD CARRIED ME HOME IN HIS ARMS, EXPECTING that I wouldn't be able to
hang on. I must have fallen asleep on the way.

When I woke up, I was in my bed and the dull light coming through my windows slanted in
from a strange angle. Almost like it was afternoon.

I yawned and stretched, my fingers searching for him and coming up empty.

"Edward?" I mumbled.

My seeking fingers encountered something cool and smooth. His hand.

"Are you really awake this time?" he murmured.

"Mmm," I sighed in assent. "Have there been a lot of false alarms?"

"You've been very restless - talking all day."

"All day ?" I blinked and looked at the windows again.

"You had a long night," he said reassuringly. "You'd earned a day in bed."

I sat up, and my head spun. The lightwas coming in my window from the west. "Wow."

"Hungry?" he guessed. "Do you want breakfast in bed?"

"I'll get it," I groaned, stretching again. "I need to get up and move around."

He held my hand on the way to the kitchen, eyeing me carefully, like I might fall over. Or
maybe he thought I was sleepwalking.

I kept it simple, throwing a couple of Pop-Tarts in the toaster. I caught a glimpse of myself in
the reflective chrome.

"Ugh, I'm a mess."

"It was a long night," he said again. "You should have stayed here and slept."

"Right! And missed everything . You know, you need to start accepting the fact that I'm part
of the family now."

He smiled. "I could probably get used to that idea."

I sat down with my breakfast, and he sat next to me. When I lifted the Pop-Tart to take the
first bite, I noticed him staring at my hand. I looked down, and saw that I was still wearing
the gift that Jacob had given me at the party.
"May I?" he asked, reaching for the tiny wooden wolf.

I swallowed noisily. "Um, sure."

He moved his hand under the charm bracelet and balanced the little figurine in his snowy
palm. For a fleeting moment, I was afraid. Just the slightest twist of his fingers could crush it
into splinters.

But of course Edward wouldn't do that. I was embarrassed I'd even had the thought. He only
weighed the wolf in his palm for a moment, and then let it fall. It swung lightly from my
wrist.

I tried to read the expression in his eyes. All I could see was thoughtfulness; he kept
everything else hidden, if therewas anything else.

"Jacob Black can give you presents."

It wasn't a question, or an accusation. Just a statement of fact. But I knew he was referring
to my last birthday and the fit I'd thrown over gifts; I hadn't wanted any. Especially not from
Edward. It wasn't entirely logical, and, of course, everyone had ignored me anyway. . . .

"You've given me presents," I reminded him. "You know I like the homemade kind."

He pursed his lips for a second. "How about hand-me-downs? Are those acceptable?"

"What do you mean?"

"This bracelet." His finger traced a circle around my wrist. "You'll be wearing this a lot?"

I shrugged.

"Because you wouldn't want to hurt his feelings," he suggested shrewdly.

"Sure, I guess so."

"Don't you think it's fair, then," he asked, looking down at my hand as he spoke. He turned it
palm up, and ran his finger along the veins in my wrist. "If I have a little representation?"

"Representation?"

"A charm - something to keep me on your mind."

"You're in every thought I have. I don't need reminders."

"If I gave you something, would you wear it?" he pressed.

"A hand-me-down?" I checked.
"Yes, something I've had for a while." He smiled his angel's smile.

If this was the only reaction to Jacob's gift, I would take it gladly. "Whatever makes you
happy."

"Have you noticed the inequality?" he asked, and his voice turned accusing. "Because I
certainly have."

"What inequality?"

His eyes narrowed. "Everyone else is able to get away with giving you things. Everyone but
me. I would have loved to get you a graduation present, but I didn't. I knew it would have
upset you more than if anyone else did. That's utterly unfair. How do you explain yourself?"

"Easy." I shrugged. "You're more important than everyone else. And you've given me you .
That's already more than I deserve, and anything else you give me just throws us more out of
balance."

He processed that for a moment, and then rolled his eyes. "The way you regard me is
ludicrous."

I chewed my breakfast calmly. I knew he wouldn't listen if I told him that he had that
backward.

Edward's phone buzzed.

He looked at the number before he opened it. "What is it, Alice?"

He listened, and I waited for his reaction, suddenly nervous. But whatever she said didn't
surprise him. He sighed a few times.

"I sort of guessed as much," he told her, staring into my eyes, a disapproving arch to his
brow. "She was talking in her sleep."

I flushed. What had I said now?

"I'll take care of it," he promised.

He glared at me as he shut his phone. "Is there something you'd like to talk to me about?"

I deliberated for a moment. Given Alice's warning last night, I could guess why she'd called.
And then remembering the troubled dreams I'd had as I'd slept through the day - dreams
where I chased after Jasper, trying to follow him and find the clearing in the maze-like
woods, knowing I would find Edward there . . . Edward, and the monsters who wanted to
kill me, but not caring about them because I'd already made my decision - I could also guess
what Edward had overheard while I'd slept.
I pursed my lips for a moment, not quite able to meet his gaze. He waited.

"I like Jasper's idea," I finally said.

He groaned.

"I want to help. I have to do something, " I insisted.

"It wouldn't help to have you in danger."

"Jasper thinks it would. This is his area of expertise."

Edward glowered at me.

"You can't keep me away," I threatened. "I'm not going to hide out in the forest while you all
take risks for me."

Suddenly, he was fighting a smile. "Alice doesn't see youin the clearing, Bella. She sees you
stumbling around lost in the woods. You won't be able to find us; you'll just make it more
time consuming for me to find you afterward."

I tried to keep as cool as he was. "That's because Alice didn't factor in Seth Clearwater," I
said politely. "If she had, of course, she wouldn't have been able to see anything at all. But it
sounds like Seth wants to be there as much as I do. It shouldn't be too hard to persuade him
to show me the way."

Anger flickered across his face, and then he took a deep breath and composed himself. "That
might have worked . . . if you hadn't told me. Now I'll just ask Sam to give Seth certain
orders. Much as he might want to, Seth won't be able to ignore that kind of injunction."

I kept my smile pleasant. "But why would Sam give those orders? If I tell him how it would
help for me to be there? I'll bet Sam would rather do me a favor than you."

He had to compose himself again. "Maybe you're right. But I'm sure Jacob would be only too
eager to give those same orders."

I frowned. "Jacob?"

"Jacob is second in command. Did he never tell you that? His orders have to be followed,
too."

He had me, and by his smile, he knew it. My forehead crumpled. Jacob would be on his side -
in this one instance - I was sure. And Jacob never had told me that.

Edward took advantage of the fact that I was momentarily stumped, continuing in a
suspiciously smooth and soothing voice.

"I got a fascinating look into the pack's mind last night. It was better than a soap opera. I had
no idea how complex the dynamic is with such a large pack. The pull of the individual
against the plural psyche . . . Absolutely fascinating."

He was obviously trying to distract me. I glared at him.

"Jacob's been keeping a lot of secrets," he said with a grin.

I didn't answer, I just kept glaring, holding on to my argument and waiting for an opening.

"For instance, did you note the smaller gray wolf there last night?"

I nodded one stiff nod.

He chuckled. "They take all of their legends so seriously. It turns out there are things that
none of their stories prepared them for."

I sighed. "Okay, I'll bite. What are you talking about?"

"They always accepted without question that it was only the direct grandsons of the original
wolf who had the power to transform."

"So someone changed who wasn't a direct descendant?"

"No. She's a direct descendant, all right."

I blinked, and my eyes widened."She?"

He nodded. "She knows you. Her name is Leah Clearwater."

"Leah's a werewolf!" I shrieked. "What? For how long? Why didn't Jacob tell me?"

"There are things he wasn't allowed to share - their numbers, for instance. Like I said before,
when Sam gives an order, the pack simply isn't able to ignore it. Jacob was very careful to
think of other things when he was near me. Of course, after last night that's all out the
window."

"I can't believe it. Leah Clearwater!" Suddenly, I remembered Jacob speaking of Leah and
Sam, and the way he acted as if he'd said too much - after he'd said something about Sam
having to look in Leah's eyes every day and know that he'd broken all his promises. . . . Leah
on the cliff, a tear glistening on her cheek when Old Quil had spoken of the burden and
sacrifice the Quileute sons shared. . . . And Billy, spending time with Sue because she was
having trouble with her kids . . . and here the trouble actually was that both of them were
werewolves now!

I hadn't given much thought to Leah Clearwater, just to grieve for her loss when Harry had
passed away, and then to pity her again when Jacob had told her story, about how the
strange imprinting between Sam and her cousin Emily had broken Leah's heart.
And now she was part of Sam's pack, hearing his thoughts . . . and unable to hide her own.

I really hate that part,Jacob had said.Everything you're ashamed of, laid out for everyone to
see.

"Poor Leah," I whispered.

Edward snorted. "She's making life exceedingly unpleasant for the rest of them. I'm not sure
she deserves your sympathy."

"What do you mean?"

"It's hard enough for them, having to share all their thoughts. Most of them try to cooperate,
make it easier. When even one member is deliberately malicious, it's painful for everyone."

"She has reason enough," I mumbled, still on her side.

"Oh, I know," he said. "The imprinting compulsion is one of the strangest things I've ever
witnessed in my life, and I've seen some strange things." He shook his head wonderingly.
"The way Sam is tied to his Emily is impossible to describe - or I should say her Sam . Sam
really had no choice. It reminds me of A Midsummer Night's Dream with all the chaos caused
by the fairies' love spells . . . like magic." He smiled. "It's very nearly as strong as the way I
feel about you."

"Poor Leah," I said again. "But what do you mean, malicious?"

"She's constantly bringing up things they'd rather not think of," he explained. "For example,
Embry."

"What's with Embry?" I asked, surprised.

"His mother moved down from the Makah reservation seventeen years ago, when she was
pregnant with him. She's not Quileute. Everyone assumed she'd left his father behind with
the Makahs. But then he joined the pack."

"So?"

"So the prime candidates for his father are Quil Ateara Sr., Joshua Uley, or Billy Black, all of
them married at that point, of course."

"No!" I gasped. Edward was right - this was exactly like a soap opera.

"Now Sam, Jacob, and Quil all wonder which of them has a half-brother. They'd all like to
think it's Sam, since his father was never much of a father. But the doubt is always there.
Jacob's never been able to ask Billy about that."

"Wow. How did you get so much in one night?"
"The pack mind is mesmerizing. All thinking together and then separately at the same time.
There's so much to read!"

He sounded faintly regretful, like someone who'd had to put down a good book just before
the climax. I laughed.

"The pack is fascinating," I agreed. "Almost as fascinating as you are when you're trying to
distract me."

His expression became polite again - a perfect poker face.

"I have to be in that clearing, Edward."

"No," he said in a very final tone.

A certain path occurred to me at that moment.

It wasn't so much that I had to be in the clearing. I just had to be where Edward was.

Cruel,I accused myself.Selfish, selfish, selfish! Don't do it!

I ignored my better instincts. I couldn't look at him while I spoke, though. The guilt had my
eyes glued to the table.

"Okay, look, Edward," I whispered. "Here's the thing . . . I've already gone crazy once. I
know what my limits are.And I can't stand it if you leave me again. "

I didn't look up to see his reaction, afraid to know how much pain I was inflicting. I did hear
his sudden intake of breath and the silence that followed. I stared at the dark wooden
tabletop, wishing I could take the words back. But knowing I probably wouldn't. Not if it
worked.

Suddenly, his arms were around me, his hands stroking my face, my arms.He was
comfortingme. The guilt went into spiral mode. But the survival instinct was stronger. There
was no question that he was fundamental to my survival.

"You know it's not like that, Bella," he murmured. "I won't be far, and it will be over
quickly."

"I can't stand it," I insisted, still staring down. "Not knowing whether or not you'll come
back. How do I live through that, no matter how quickly it's over?"

He sighed. "It's going to be easy, Bella. There's no reason for your fears."

"None at all?"

"None."
"And everybody will be fine?"

"Everyone," he promised.

"So there's no way at all that I need to be in the clearing?"

"Of course not. Alice just told me that they're down to nineteen. We'll be able to handle it
easily."

"That's right - you said it was so easy that someone could sit out," I repeated his words from
last night. "Did you really mean that?"

"Yes."

It felt too simple - he had to see it coming.

"So easy that you could sit out?"

After a long moment of silence, I finally looked up at his expression.

The poker face was back.

I took a deep breath. "So it's one way or the other. Either there is more danger than you want
me to know about, in which case it would be right for me to be there, to do what I can to
help. Or . . . it's going to be so easy that they'll get by without you. Which way is it?"

He didn't speak.

I knew what he was thinking of - the same thing I was thinking of. Carlisle. Esme. Emmett.
Rosalie. Jasper. And . . . I forced myself to think the last name. And Alice.

I wondered if I was a monster. Not the kind that he thought he was, but the real kind. The
kind that hurt people. The kind that had no limits when it came to what they wanted.

What I wanted was to keep him safe, safe with me. Did I have a limit to what I would do,
what I would sacrifice for that? I wasn't sure.

"You ask me to let them fight without my help?" he said in a quiet voice.

"Yes." I was surprised I could keep my voice even, I felt so wretched inside. "Or to let me be
there. Either way, so long as we're together."

He took a deep breath, and then exhaled slowly. He moved his hands to place them on either
side of my face, forcing me to meet his gaze. He looked into my eyes for a long time. I
wondered what he was looking for, and what it was that he found. Was the guilt as thick on
my face as it was in my stomach - sickening me?

His eyes tightened against some emotion I couldn't read, and he dropped one hand to pull out
his phone again.

"Alice," he sighed. "Could you come babysit Bella for a bit?" He raised one eyebrow, daring
me to object to the word. "I need to speak with Jasper."

She evidently agreed. He put the phone away and went back to staring at my face.

"What are you going to say to Jasper?" I whispered.

"I'm going to discuss . . . me sitting out."

It was easy to read in his face how difficult the words were for him.

"I'm sorry."

I was sorry. I hated to make him do this. Not enough that I could fake a smile and tell him to
go on ahead without me. Definitely not that much.

"Don't apologize," he said, smiling just a little. "Never be afraid to tell me how you feel,
Bella. If this is what you need . . ." He shrugged. "You are my first priority."

"I didn't mean it that way - like you have to choose me over your family."

"I know that. Besides, that's not what you asked. You gave me two alternatives that you
could live with, and I chose the one thatI could live with. That's how compromise is
supposed to work."

I leaned forward and rested my forehead against his chest. "Thank you," I whispered.

"Anytime," he answered, kissing my hair. "Anything."

We didn't move for a long moment. I kept my face hidden, pressed against his shirt. Two
voices struggled inside me. One that wanted to be good and brave, and one that told the
good one to keep her mouth shut.

"Who's the third wife?" he asked me suddenly.

"Huh?" I said, stalling. I didn't remember having had that dream again.

"You were mumbling something about 'the third wife' last night. The rest made a little sense,
but you lost me there."

"Oh. Um, yeah. That was just one of the stories that I heard at the bonfire the other night." I
shrugged. "I guess it stuck with me."

Edward leaned away from me and cocked his head to the side, probably confused by the
uncomfortable edge to my voice.
Before he could ask, Alice appeared in the kitchen doorway with a sour expression.

"You're going to miss all the fun," she grumbled.

"Hello, Alice," he greeted her. He put one finger under my chin and tilted my face up to kiss
me goodbye.

"I'll be back later tonight," he promised me. "I'll go work this out with the others, rearrange
things."

"Okay."

"There's not much to arrange," Alice said. "I already told them. Emmett is pleased."

Edward sighed. "Of course he is."

He walked out the door, leaving me to face Alice.

She glared at me.

"I'm sorry," I apologized again. "Do you think this will make it more dangerous for you?"

She snorted. "You worry too much, Bella. You're going to go prematurely gray."

"Why are you upset, then?"

"Edward is such a grouch when he doesn't get his way. I'm just anticipating living with him
for the next few months." She made a face. "I suppose, if it keeps you sane, it's worth it. But
I wish you could control the pessimism, Bella. It's so unnecessary."

"Would you let Jasper go without you?" I demanded.

Alice grimaced. "That's different."

"Sure it is."

"Go clean yourself up," she ordered me. "Charlie will be home in fifteen minutes, and if you
look this ragged he's not going to want to let you out again."

Wow, I'd really lost the whole day. It felt like such a waste. I was glad I wouldn't always
have to squander my time with sleeping.

I was entirely presentable when Charlie got home - fully dressed, hair decent, and in the
kitchen putting his dinner on the table. Alice sat in Edward's usual place, and this seemed to
make Charlie's day.

"Howdy, Alice! How are you, hon?"
"I'm fine, Charlie, thanks."

"I see you finally made it out of bed, sleepyhead," he said to me as I sat beside him, before
turning back to Alice. "Everyone's talking about that party your parents threw last night. I'll
bet you've got one heck of a clean-up job ahead of you."

Alice shrugged. Knowing her, it was already done.

"It was worth it," she said. "It was a great party."

"Where's Edward?" Charlie asked, a little grudgingly. "Is he helping clean up?"

Alice sighed and her face turned tragic. It was probably an act, but it was too perfect for me
to be positive. "No. He's off planning the weekend with Emmett and Carlisle."

"Hiking again?"

Alice nodded, her face suddenly forlorn. "Yes. They're all going, except me. We always go
backpacking at the end of the school year, sort of a celebration, but this year I decided I'd
rather shop than hike, and not one of them will stay behind with me. I'm abandoned."

Her face puckered, the expression so devastated that Charlie leaned toward her
automatically, one hand reaching out, looking for some way to help. I glared at her
suspiciously. What was she doing?

"Alice, honey, why don't you come stay with us," Charlie offered. "I hate to think of you all
alone in that big house."

She sighed. Something squashed my foot under the table.

"Ow!" I protested.

Charlie turned to me. "What?"

Alice shot me a frustrated look. I could tell she thought that I was very slow tonight.

"Stubbed my toe," I muttered.

"Oh." He looked back at Alice. "So, how 'bout it?"

She stepped on my foot again, not quite so hard this time.

"Er, Dad, you know, we don't really have the best accommodations here. I bet Alice doesn't
want to sleep on my floor. . . ."

Charlie pursed his lips. Alice pulled out the devastated expression again.

"Maybe Bella should stay up there with you," he suggested. "Just until your folks get back."
"Oh, would you, Bella?" Alice smiled at me radiantly. "You don't mind shopping with me,
right?"

"Sure," I agreed. "Shopping. Okay."

"When are they leaving?" Charlie asked.

Alice made another face. "Tomorrow."

"When do you want me?" I asked.

"After dinner, I guess," she said, and then put one finger to her chin, thoughtful. "You don't
have anything going on Saturday, do you? I want to get out of town to shop, and it will be
an all-day thing."

"Not Seattle," Charlie interjected, his eyebrows pulling together.

"Of course not," Alice agreed at once, though we both knew Seattle would be plenty safe on
Saturday. "I was thinking Olympia, maybe. . . ."

"You'll like that, Bella." Charlie was cheerful with relief. "Go get your fill of the city."

"Yeah, Dad. It'll be great."

With one easy conversation, Alice had cleared my schedule for the battle.

Edward returned not much later. He accepted Charlie's wishes for a nice trip without
surprise. He claimed they were leaving early in the morning, and said goodnight before the
usual time. Alice left with him.

I excused myself soon after they left.

"You can't be tired," Charlie protested.

"A little," I lied.

"No wonder you like to skip the parties," he muttered. "It takes you so long to recover."

Upstairs, Edward was lying across my bed.

"What time are we meeting with the wolves?" I murmured as I went to join him.

"In an hour."

"That's good. Jake and his friends need to get some sleep."

"They don't need as much as you do," he pointed out.

I moved to another topic, assuming he was about to try to talk me into staying home. "Did
Alice tell you that she's kidnapping me again?"

He grinned. "Actually, she's not."

I stared at him, confused, and he laughed quietly at my expression.

"I'm the only one who has permission to hold you hostage, remember?" he said. "Alice is
going hunting with the rest of them." He sighed. "I guess I don't need to do that now."

"You'rekidnapping me?"

He nodded.

I thought about that briefly. No Charlie listening downstairs, checking on me every so often.
And no houseful of wide-awake vampires with their intrusively sensitive hearing. . . . Just
him and me - really alone.

"Is that all right?" he asked, concerned by my silence.

"Well . . . sure, except for one thing."

"What thing?" His eyes were anxious. It was mind-boggling, but, somehow, he still seemed
unsure of his hold on me. Maybe I needed to make myself more clear.

"Why didn't Alice tell Charlie you were leaving tonight ?" I asked.

He laughed, relieved.

I enjoyed the trip to the clearing more than I had last night. I still felt guilty, still afraid, but I
wasn't terrified anymore. I could function. I could see past what was coming, and almost
believe that maybe itwould be okay. Edward was apparently fine with the idea of missing the
fight . . . and that made it very hard not to believe him when he said this would be easy. He
wouldn't leave his family if he didn't believe it himself. Maybe Alice was right, and I did
worry too much.

We got to the clearing last.

Jasper and Emmett were already wrestling - just warming up from the sounds of their
laughter. Alice and Rosalie lounged on the hard ground, watching. Esme and Carlisle were
talking a few yards away, heads close together, fingers linked, not paying attention.

It was much brighter tonight, the moon shining through the thin clouds, and I could easily
see the three wolves that sat around the edge of the practice ring, spaced far apart to watch
from different angles.

It was also easy to recognize Jacob; I would have known him at once, even if he hadn't
looked up and stared at the sound of our approach.
"Where are the rest of the wolves?" I wondered.

"They don't all need to be here. One would do the job, but Sam didn't trust us enough to just
send Jacob, though Jacob was willing. Quil and Embry are his usual . . . I guess you could
call them his wingmen."

"Jacob trusts you."

Edward nodded. "He trusts us not to try to kill him. That's about it, though."

"Are you participating tonight?" I asked, hesitant. I knew this was going to be almost as hard
for him as being left behind would have been for me. Maybe harder.

"I'll help Jasper when he needs it. He wants to try some unequal groupings, teach them how
to deal with multiple attackers."

He shrugged.

And a fresh wave of panic shattered my brief sense of confidence.

They were still outnumbered. I was making that worse.

I stared at the field, trying to hide my reaction.

It was the wrong place to look, struggling as I was to lie to myself, to convince myself that
everything would work out as I needed it to. Because when I forced my eyes away from the
Cullens - away from the image of their play fighting that would be real and deadly in just a
few days - Jacob caught my eyes and smiled.

It was the same wolfy grin as before, his eyes scrunching the way they did when he was
human.

It was hard to believe that, not so long ago, I'd found the werewolves frightening - lost sleep
to nightmares about them.

I knew, without asking, which of the others was Embry and which was Quil. Because Embry
was clearly the thinner gray wolf with the dark spots on his back, who sat so patiently
watching, while Quil - deep chocolate brown, lighter over his face - twitched constantly,
looking like he was dying to join in the mock fight. They weren't monsters, even like this.
They were friends.

Friends who didn't look nearly as indestructible as Emmett and Jasper did, moving faster
than cobra strikes while the moonlight glinted off their granite-hard skin. Friends who didn't
seem to understand the danger involved here. Friends who were still somewhat mortal,
friends who could bleed, friends who could die. . . .

Edward's confidence was reassuring, because it was plain that he wasn't truly worried about
his family. But would it hurt him if something happened to the wolves? Was there any reason
for him to be anxious, if that possibility didn't bother him? Edward's confidence only applied
to one set of my fears.

I tried to smile back at Jacob, swallowing against the lump in my throat. I didn't seem to get
it right.

Jacob sprang lightly to his feet, his agility at odds with his sheer mass, and trotted over to
where Edward and I stood on the fringe of things.

"Jacob," Edward greeted him politely.

Jacob ignored him, his dark eyes on me. He put his head down to my level, as he had
yesterday, cocking it to one side. A low whimper escaped his muzzle.

"I'm fine," I answered, not needing the translation that Edward was about to give. "Just
worried, you know."

Jacob continued to stare at me.

"He wants to know why," Edward murmured.

Jacob growled - not a threatening sound, an annoyed sound - and Edward's lips twitched.

"What?" I asked.

"He thinks my translations leave something to be desired. What he actually thought was,
'That's really stupid. What is there to be worried about?' I edited, because I thought it was
rude."

I halfway smiled, too anxious to really feel amused. "There's plenty to be worried about," I
told Jacob. "Like a bunch of really stupid wolves getting themselves hurt."

Jacob laughed his coughing bark.

Edward sighed. "Jasper wants help. You'll be okay without a translator?"

"I'll manage."

Edward looked at me wistfully for one minute, his expression hard to understand, then
turned his back and strode over to where Jasper waited.

I sat down where I was. The ground was cold and uncomfortable.

Jacob took a step forward, then looked back at me, and a low whine rose in his throat. He
took another half-step.

"Go on without me," I told him. "I don't want to watch."
Jacob leaned his head to the side again for a moment, and then folded himself on to the
ground beside me with a rumbling sigh.

"Really, you can go ahead," I assured him. He didn't respond, he just put his head down on
his paws.

I stared up at the bright silver clouds, not wanting to see the fight. My imagination had more
than enough fuel. A breeze blew through the clearing, and I shivered.

Jacob scooted himself closer to me, pressing his warm fur against my left side.

"Er, thanks," I muttered.

After a few minutes, I leaned against his wide shoulder. It was much more comfortable that
way.

The clouds moved slowly across the sky, dimming and brightening as thick patches crossed
the moon and passed on.

Absently, I began pulling my fingers through the fur on his neck. That same strange
humming sound that he'd made yesterday rumbled in his throat. It was a homey kind of
sound. Rougher, wilder than a cat's purr, but conveying the same sense of contentment.

"You know, I never had a dog," I mused. "I always wanted one, but Renée's allergic."

Jacob laughed; his body shook under me.

"Aren't you worried about Saturday at all?" I asked.

He turned his enormous head toward me, so that I could see one of his eyes roll.

"I wish I could feel that positive."

He leaned his head against my leg and started humming again. And it did make me feel just a
little bit better.

"So we've got some hiking to do tomorrow, I guess."

He rumbled; the sound was enthusiastic.

"It might be along hike," I warned him. "Edward doesn't judge distances the way a normal
person does."

Jacob barked another laugh.

I settled deeper into his warm fur, resting my head against his neck.

It was strange. Even though he was in this bizarre form, this felt more like the way Jake and I
used to be - the easy, effortless friendship that was as natural as breathing in and out - than
the last few times I'd been with Jacob while he was human. Odd that I should find that again
here, when I'd thought this wolf thing was the cause of its loss.

The killing games continued in the clearing, and I stared at the hazy moon.

THE WIND SHOOK THE TENT AGAIN, AND I SHOOK WITH IT.

The temperature was dropping. I could feel it through the down bag, through my jacket. I
was fully dressed, my hiking boots still laced into place. It didn't make any difference. How
could it be so cold? How could itkeep getting colder? It had to bottom out sometime, didn't
it?

"W-w-w-w-w-what t-t-t-t-time is it?" I forced the words through my rattling teeth.

"Two," Edward answered.

Edward sat as far from me as possible in the cramped space, afraid to even breathe on me
when I was already so cold. It was too dark to see his face, but his voice was wild with
worry, indecision, and frustration.

"Maybe . . ."

"No, I'm f-f-f-f-f-fine, r-r-r-really. I don't w-w-w-want to g-go outside."

He'd tried to talk me into making a run for it a dozen times already, but I was terrified of
leaving my shelter. If it was this cold in here, protected from the raging wind, I could imagine
how bad it would be if we were running through it.

And it would waste all our efforts this afternoon. Would we have enough time to reset
ourselves when the storm was over? What if it didn't end? It made no sense to move now. I
could shiver my way through one night.

I was worried that the trail I had laid would be lost, but he promised that it would still be
plain to the coming monsters.

"What can I do?" he almost begged.

I just shook my head.

Out in the snow, Jacob whined unhappily.

"G-g-g-get out of h-h-h-ere," I ordered, again.

"He's just worried about you," Edward translated. "He's fine. His body is equipped to deal
with this."

"H-h-h-h-h-h." I wanted to say that he should still leave, but I couldn't get it past my teeth. I
nearly bit my tongue off trying. At least Jacob did seem to be well equipped for the snow,
better even than the others in his pack with his thicker, longer, shaggy russet fur. I wondered
why that was.
Jacob whimpered, a high-pitched, grating sound of complaint.

"What do you want me to do?" Edward growled, too anxious to bother with politeness
anymore. "Carry her through that ? I don't see you making yourself useful. Why don't you go
fetch a space heater or something?"

"I'm ok-k-k-k-k-k-kay," I protested. Judging from Edward's groan and the muted growl
outside the tent, I hadn't convinced anyone. The wind rocked the tent roughly, and I
shuddered in harmony with it.

A sudden howl ripped through the roar of the wind, and I covered my ears against the noise.
Edward scowled.

"That was hardly necessary," he muttered. "And that's the worst idea I've ever heard," he
called more loudly.

"Better than anything you've come up with," Jacob answered, his human voice startling
me."Go fetch a space heater," he grumbled. "I'm not a St. Bernard."

I heard the sound of the zipper around the tent door pulling swiftly down.

Jacob slid through the smallest opening he could manage, while the arctic air flowed in
around him, a few flecks of snow falling to the floor of the tent. I shivered so hard it was a
convulsion.

"I don't like this," Edward hissed as Jake zipped the tent door shut. "Just give her the coat
and get out."

My eyes were adjusted enough to see shapes - Jacob was carrying the parka that had been
hanging on a tree next to the tent.

I tried to ask what they were talking about, but all that came out of my mouth was,
"W-w-w-w-w-w," as the shivering made me stutter uncontrollably.

"The parka's for tomorrow - she's too cold to warm it up by herself. It's frozen." He dropped
it by the door. "You said she needed a space heater, and here I am." Jacob held his arms as
wide as the tent allowed. As usual, when he'd been running around as a wolf, he'd only
thrown on the bare essentials - just a pair of sweats, no shirt, no shoes.

"J-J-J-J-Jake, you'll f-f-f-freez-z-z-ze," I tried to complain.

"Not me," he said cheerfully. "I run at a toasty one-oh-eight point nine these days. I'll have
you sweating in no time."

Edward snarled, but Jacob didn't even look at him. Instead, he crawled to my side and started
unzipping my sleeping bag.
Edward's hand was suddenly hard on his shoulder, restraining, snow white against the dark
skin. Jacob's jaw clenched, his nostrils flaring, his body recoiling from the cold touch. The
long muscles in his arms flexed automatically.

"Get your hand off of me," he growled through his teeth.

"Keep your hands off of her," Edward answered blackly.

"D-d-d-don't f-f-f-f-fight," I pleaded. Another tremor rocked through me. It felt like my teeth
were going to shatter, they were slamming together so hard.

"I'm sure she'll thank you for this when her toes turn black and drop off," Jacob snapped.

Edward hesitated, then his hand fell away and he slid back to his position in the corner.

His voice was flat and frightening. "Watch yourself."

Jacob chuckled.

"Scoot over, Bella," he said, zipping the sleeping bag open farther.

I stared at him in outrage. No wonder Edward was reacting this way.

"N-n-n-n-n," I tried to protest.

"Don't be stupid," he said, exasperated. "Don't you like having ten toes?"

He crammed his body into the nonexistent space, forcing the zipper up behind himself.

And then I couldn't object - I didn't want to anymore. He was so warm. His arms constricted
around me, holding me snugly against his bare chest. The heat was irresistible, like air after
being underwater for too long. He cringed when I pressed my icy fingers eagerly against his
skin.

"Jeez, you're freezing, Bella," he complained.

"S-s-s-s-sorry," I stuttered.

"Try to relax," he suggested as another shiver rippled through me violently. "You'll be warm
in a minute. Of course, you'd warm up faster if you took your clothes off."

Edward growled sharply.

"That's just a simple fact," Jacob defended himself. "Survival one-oh-one."

"C-c-cut it out, Jake," I said angrily, though my body refused to even try to pull away from
him. "N-n-n-nobody really n-n-n-n-needs all ten t-t-t-toes."
"Don't worry about the bloodsucker," Jacob suggested, and his tone was smug. "He's just
jealous."

"Of course I am." Edward's voice was velvet again, under control, a musical murmur in the
darkness. "You don't have the faintest idea how much I wish I could do what you're doing
for her, mongrel."

"Those are the breaks," Jacob said lightly, but then his tone soured. "At least you know she
wishes it was you."

"True," Edward agreed.

The shuddering slowed, became bearable while they wrangled.

"There," Jacob said, pleased. "Feeling better?"

I was finally able to speak clearly. "Yes."

"Your lips are still blue," he mused. "Want me to warm those up for you, too? You only have
to ask."

Edward sighed heavily.

"Behave yourself," I muttered, pressing my face against his shoulder. He flinched again when
my cold skin touched his, and I smiled with slightly vindictive satisfaction.

It was already warm and snug inside the sleeping bag. Jacob's body heat seemed to radiate
from every side - maybe because there was so much of him. I kicked my boots off, and pushed
my toes against his legs. He jumped slightly, and then leaned his head down to press his hot
cheek against my numb ear.

I noticed that Jacob's skin had a woodsy, musky scent - it fit the setting, here in the middle of
the forest. It was nice. I wondered if the Cullens and the Quileutes weren't just playing up
that whole odor issue because of their prejudices. Everyone smelled fine to me.

The storm howled like an animal attacking the tent, but it didn't worry me now. Jacob was
out of the cold, and so was I. Plus, I was simply too exhausted to worry about anything -
tired from just staying awake so late, and aching from the muscle spasms. My body relaxed
slowly as I thawed, piece by frozen piece, and then turned limp.

"Jake?" I mumbled sleepily. "Can I ask you something? I'm not trying to be a jerk or
anything, I'm honestly curious." They were the same words he'd used in my kitchen . . . how
long ago was it now?

"Sure," he chuckled, remembering.

"Why are you so much furrier than your friends? You don't have to answer if I'm being rude."
I didn't know the rules for etiquette as they applied to werewolf culture.

"Because my hair is longer," he said, amused - my question hadn't offended him, at least. He
shook his head so that his unkempt hair - grown out to his chin now - tickled my cheek.

"Oh." I was surprised, but it made sense. So that was why they'd all cropped their hair in the
beginning, when they joined the pack. "Then why don't you cut it? Do you like to be
shaggy?"

He didn't answer right away this time, and Edward laughed under his breath.

"Sorry," I said, pausing to yawn. "I didn't mean to pry. You don't have to tell me."

Jacob made an annoyed sound. "Oh, he'll tell you anyway, so I might as well. . . . I was
growing my hair out because . . . it seemed like you liked it better long."

"Oh." I felt awkward. "I, er, like it both ways, Jake. You don't need to be . . .
inconvenienced."

He shrugged. "Turns out it was very convenient tonight, so don't worry about it."

I didn't have anything else to say. As the silence lengthened, my eyelids drooped and shut,
and my breathing grew slower, more even.

"That's right, honey, go to sleep," Jacob whispered.

I sighed, content, already half-unconscious.

"Seth is here," Edward muttered to Jacob, and I suddenly understood the point of the
howling.

"Perfect. Now you can keep an eye on everything else, while I take care of your girlfriend for
you."

Edward didn't answer, but I groaned groggily. "Stop it," I muttered.

It was quiet then, inside at least. Outside, the wind shrieked insanely through the trees. The
shimmying of the tent made it hard to sleep. The poles would suddenly jerk and quiver,
pulling me back from the edge of unconsciousness each time I was close to slipping under. I
felt so bad for the wolf, the boy that was stuck outside in the snow.

My mind wandered as I waited for sleep to find me. This warm little space made me think of
the early days with Jacob, and I remembered how it used to be when he was my replacement
sun, the warmth that made my empty life livable. It had been a while since I'd thought of
Jake that way, but here he was, warming me again.

"Please!" Edward hissed. "Do you mind !"
"What?" Jacob whispered back, his tone surprised.

"Do you think you could attempt to control your thoughts?" Edward's low whisper was
furious.

"No one said you had to listen," Jacob muttered, defiant, yet still embarrassed. "Get out of
my head."

"I wish I could. You have no idea how loud your little fantasies are. It's like you're shouting
them at me."

"I'll try to keep it down," Jacob whispered sarcastically.

There was a brief moment of silence.

"Yes," Edward answered an unspoken thought in a murmur so low I barely made it out. "I'm
jealous of that, too."

"I figured it was like that," Jacob whispered smugly. "Sort of evens the playing field up a
little, doesn't it?"

Edward chuckled. "In your dreams."

"You know, she could still change her mind," Jacob taunted him. "Considering all the things I
could do with her that you can't. At least, not without killing her, that is."

"Go to sleep, Jacob," Edward murmured. "You're starting to get on my nerves."

"I think I will. I'm really very comfortable."

Edward didn't answer.

I was too far gone to ask them to stop talking about me like I wasn't there. The conversation
had taken on a dreamlike quality to me, and I wasn't sure I was really awake.

"Maybe I would," Edward said after a moment, answering a question I hadn't heard.

"But would you be honest?"

"You can always ask and see." Edward's tone made me wonder if I was missing out on a
joke.

"Well, you see inside my head - let me see inside yours tonight, it's only fair," Jacob said.

"Your head is full of questions. Which one do you want me to answer?"

"The jealousy . . . it has to be eating at you. You can't be as sure of yourself as you seem.
Unless you have no emotions at all."
"Of course it is," Edward agreed, no longer amused. "Right now it's so bad that I can barely
control my voice. Of course, it's even worse when she's away from me, with you, and I can't
see her."

"Do you think about it all the time?" Jacob whispered. "Does it make it hard to concentrate
when she's not with you?"

"Yes and no," Edward said; he seemed determined to answer honestly. "My mind doesn't
work quite the same as yours. I can think of many more things at one time. Of course, that
means that I'm always able to think of you, always able to wonder if that's where her mind is,
when she's quiet and thoughtful."

They were both still for a minute.

"Yes, I would guess that she thinks about you often," Edward murmured in response to
Jacob's thoughts. "More often than I like. She worries that you're unhappy. Not that you
don't know that. Not that you don't use that."

"I have to use whatever I can," Jacob muttered. "I'm not working with your advantages -
advantages like her knowing she's in love with you."

"That helps," Edward agreed in a mild tone.

Jacob was defiant. "She's in love with me, too, you know."

Edward didn't answer.

Jacob sighed. "But she doesn't know it."

"I can't tell you if you're right."

"Does that bother you? Do you wish you could see what she's thinking, too?"

"Yes . . . and no, again. She likes it better this way, and, though it sometimes drives me
insane, I'd rather she was happy."

The wind ripped around the tent, shaking it like an earthquake. Jacob's arms tightened
around me protectively.

"Thank you," Edward whispered. "Odd as this might sound, I suppose I'm glad you're here,
Jacob."

"You mean, 'as much as I'd love to kill you, I'm glad she's warm,' right?"

"It's an uncomfortable truce, isn't it?"

Jacob's whisper was suddenly smug. "I knew you were just as crazy jealous as I am."
"I'm not such a fool as to wear it on my sleeve like you do. It doesn't help your case, you
know."

"You have more patience than I do."

"I should. I've had a hundred years to gain it. A hundred years of waiting forher. "

"So . . . at what point did you decide to play the very patient good guy?"

"When I saw how much it was hurting her to make her choose. It's not usually this difficult
to control. I can smother the . . . less civilized feelings I may have for you fairly easily most of
the time. Sometimes I think she sees through me, but I can't be sure."

"I think you were just worried that if you really forced her to choose, she might not choose
you."

Edward didn't answer right away. "That was a part of it," he finally admitted. "But only a
small part. We all have our moments of doubt. Mostly I was worried that she'd hurt herself
trying to sneak away to see you. After I'd accepted that she was more or less safe with you -
as safe as Bella ever is - it seemed best to stop driving her to extremes."

Jacob sighed. "I'd tell her all of this, but she'd never believe me."

"I know." It sounded like Edward was smiling.

"You think you know everything," Jacob muttered.

"I don't know the future," Edward said, his voice suddenly unsure.

There was a long pause.

"What would you do if she changed her mind?" Jacob asked.

"I don't know that either."

Jacob chuckled quietly. "Would you try to kill me?" Sarcastic again, as if doubting Edward's
ability to do it.

"No."

"Why not?" Jacob's tone was still jeering.

"Do you really think I would hurt her that way?"

Jacob hesitated for a second, and then sighed. "Yeah, you're right. I know that's right. But
sometimes . . ."

"Sometimes it's an intriguing idea."
Jacob pressed his face into the sleeping bag to muffle his laugher. "Exactly," he eventually
agreed.

What a strange dream this was. I wondered if it was the relentless wind that made me
imagine all the whispering. Only the wind was screaming rather than whispering . . .

"What is it like? Losing her?" Jacob asked after a quiet moment, and there was no hint of
humor in his suddenly hoarse voice. "When you thought that you'd lost her forever? How did
you . . . cope?"

"That's very difficult for me to talk about."

Jacob waited.

"There were two different times that I thought that." Edward spoke each word just a little
slower than normal. "The first time, when I thought I could leave her . . . that was . . . almost
bearable. Because I thought she would forget me and it would be like I hadn't touched her
life. For over six months I was able to stay away, to keep my promise that I wouldn't
interfere again. It was getting close - I was fighting but I knew I wasn't going to win; I
would have come back . . . just to check on her. That's what I would have told myself,
anyway. And if I'd found her reasonably happy . . . I like to think that I could have gone away
again.

"But she wasn't happy. And I would have stayed. That's how she convinced me to stay with
her tomorrow, of course. You were wondering about that before, what could possibly
motivate me . . . what she was feeling so needlessly guilty about. She reminded me of what it
did to her when I left - what it still does to her when I leave. She feels horrible about
bringing that up, but she's right. I'll never be able to make up for that, but I'll never stop
trying anyway."

Jacob didn't respond for a moment, listening to the storm or digesting what he'd heard, I
didn't know which.

"And the other time - when you thought she was dead?" Jacob whispered roughly.

"Yes." Edward answered a different question. "It will probably feel like that to you, won't it?
The way you perceive us, you might not be able to see her as Bella anymore. But that's who
she'll be."

"That's not what I asked."

Edward's voice came back fast and hard. "I can't tell you how it felt. There aren't words."

Jacob's arms flexed around me.

"But you left because you didn't want to make her a bloodsucker. You want her to be
human."
Edward spoke slowly. "Jacob, from the second that I realized that I loved her, I knew there
were only four possibilities. The first alternative, the best one for Bella, would be if she didn't
feel as strongly for me - if she got over me and moved on. I would accept that, though it
would never change the way I felt. You think of me as a . . . living stone - hard and cold.
That's true. We are set the way we are, and it is very rare for us to experience a real change.
When that happens, as when Bella entered my life, it is a permanent change. There's no
going back. . . .

"The second alternative, the one I'd originally chosen, was to stay with her throughout her
human life. It wasn't a good option for her, to waste her life with someone who couldn't be
human with her, but it was the alternative I could most easily face. Knowing all along that,
when she died, I would find a way to die, too. Sixty years, seventy years - it would seem like
a very, very short time to me. . . . But then it proved much too dangerous for her to live in
such close proximity with my world. It seemed like everything that could go wrong did. Or
hung over us . . . waiting to go wrong. I was terrified that I wouldn't get those sixty years if I
stayed near her while she was human.

"So I chose option three. Which turned out to be the worst mistake of my very long life, as
you know. I chose to take myself out of her world, hoping to force her into the first
alternative. It didn't work, and it very nearly killed us both.

"What do I have left but the fourth option? It's what she wants - at least, she thinks she does.
I've been trying to delay her, to give her time to find a reason to change her mind, but she's
very . . . stubborn. You know that. I'll be lucky to stretch this out a few more months. She has
a horror of getting older, and her birthday is in September. . . ."

"I like option one," Jacob muttered.

Edward didn't respond.

"You know exactly how much I hate to accept this," Jacob whispered slowly, "but I can see
that you do love her . . . in your way. I can't argue with that anymore.

"Given that, I don't think you should give up on the first alternative, not yet. I think there's a
very good chance that she would be okay. After time. You know, if she hadn't jumped off a
cliff in March . . . and if you'd waited another six months to check on her. . . . Well, you
might have found her reasonably happy. I had a game plan."

Edward chuckled. "Maybe it would have worked. It was a well thought-out plan."

"Yeah." Jake sighed. "But . . . ," suddenly he was whispering so fast the words got tangled,
"give me a year, bl - Edward. I really think I could make her happy. She's stubborn, no one
knows that better than I do, but she's capable of healing. She would have healed before. And
she could be human, with Charlie and Renée, and she could grow up, and have kids and . . .
be Bella.
"You love her enough that you have to see the advantages of that plan. She thinks you're
very unselfish . . . are you really? Can you consider the idea that I might be better for her than
you are?"

"I have considered it," Edward answered quietly. "In some ways, you would be better suited
for her than another human. Bella takes some looking after, and you're strong enough that
you could protect her from herself, and from everything that conspires against her. You have
done that already, and I'll owe you for that for as long as I live - forever - whichever comes
first. . . .

"I even asked Alice if she could see that - see if Bella would be better off with you. She
couldn't, of course. She can't see you, and then Bella's sure of her course, for now.

"But I'm not stupid enough to make the same mistake I made before, Jacob. I won't try to
force her into that first option again. As long as she wants me, I'm here."

"And if she were to decide that she wanted me?" Jacob challenged. "Okay, it's a long shot,
I'll give you that."

"I would let her go."

"Just like that?"

"In the sense that I'd never show her how hard it was for me, yes. But I would keep watch.
You see, Jacob,you might leave her someday. Like Sam and Emily, you wouldn't have a
choice. I would always be waiting in the wings, hoping for that to happen."

Jacob snorted quietly. "Well, you've been much more honest than I had any right to expect . .
. Edward. Thanks for letting me in your head."

"As I said, I'm feeling oddly grateful for your presence in her life tonight. It was the least I
could do. . . . You know, Jacob, if it weren't for the fact that we're natural enemies and that
you're also trying to steal away the reason for my existence, I might actually like you."

"Maybe . . . if you weren't a disgusting vampire who was planning to suck out the life of the
girl I love . . . well, no, not even then."

Edward chuckled.

"Can I ask you something?" Edward said after a moment.

"Why would you have to ask?"

"I can only hear if you think of it. It's just a story that Bella seemed reluctant to tell me about
the other day. Something about a third wife . . . ?"

"What about it?"
Edward didn't answer, listening to the story in Jacob's head. I heard his low hiss in the
darkness.

"What?" Jacob demanded again.

"Of course," Edward seethed. "Of course! I rather wish your elders had kept that story to
themselves, Jacob."

"You don't like the leeches being painted as the bad guys?" Jacob mocked. "You know,
they are. Then and now."

"I really couldn't care less about that part. Can't you guess which character Bella would
identify with?"

It took Jacob a minute. "Oh. Ugh. The third wife. Okay, I see your point."

"She wants to be there in the clearing. To do what little she can, as she puts it." He sighed.
"That was the secondary reason for my staying with her tomorrow. She's quite inventive
when she wants something."

"You know, your military brother gave her the idea just as much as the story did."

"Neither side meant any harm," Edward whispered, peace-making now.

"And when does this little truce end?" Jacob asked. "First light? Or do we wait until after the
fight?"

There was a pause as they both considered.

"First light," they whispered together, and then laughed quietly.

"Sleep well, Jacob," Edward murmured. "Enjoy the moment."

It was quiet again, and the tent held still for a few minutes. The wind seemed to have
decided that it wasn't going to flatten us after all, and was giving up the fight.

Edward groaned softly. "I didn't mean that quite so literally."

"Sorry," Jacob whispered. "You could leave, you know - give us a little privacy."

"Would you like me to help you sleep, Jacob?" Edward offered.

"You could try," Jacob said, unconcerned. "It would be interesting to see who walked away,
wouldn't it?"

"Don't tempt me too far, wolf. My patience isn't that perfect."

Jacob whispered a laugh. "I'd rather not move just now, if you don't mind."
Edward started humming to himself, louder than usual - trying to drown out Jacob's
thoughts, I assumed. But it was my lullaby he hummed, and, despite my growing discomfort
with this whispered dream, I sank deeper into unconsciousness . . . into other dreams that
made better sense. . . .


THE COUNTER IN ALICE'S BATHROOM WAS COVERED WITH a thousand different
products, all claiming to beautify a person's surface. Since everyone in this house was both
perfect and impermeable, I could only assume that she'd bought most of these things with me
in mind. I read the labels numbly, struck by the waste.

I was careful never to look in the long mirror.

Alice combed through my hair with a slow, rhythmic motion.

"That's enough, Alice," I said tonelessly. "I want to go back to La Push."

How many hours had I waited for Charlie to finally leave Billy's house so that I could see
Jacob? Each minute, not knowing if Jacob was still breathing or not, had seemed like ten
lifetimes. And then, when at last I'd been allowed to go, to see for myself that Jacob was
alive, the time had gone so quickly. I felt like I'd barely caught my breath before Alice was
calling Edward, insisting that I keep up this ridiculous sleepover façade. It seemed so
insignificant. . . .

"Jacob's still unconscious," Alice answered. "Carlisle or Edward will call when he's awake.
Anyway, you need to go see Charlie. He was there at Billy's house, he saw that Carlisle and
Edward are back in from their trip, and he's bound to be suspicious when you get home."

I already had my story memorized and corroborated. "I don't care. I want to be there when
Jacob wakes up."

"You need to think of Charlie now. You've had a long day - sorry, I know that doesn't begin
to cover it - but that doesn't mean that you can shirk your responsibilities." Her voice was
serious, almost chiding. "It's more important now than ever that Charlie stays safely in the
dark. Play your role first, Bella, and then you can do what you want second. Part of being a
Cullen is being meticulously responsible."

Of course she was right. And if not for this same reason - a reason that was more powerful
than all my fear and pain and guilt - Carlisle would never have been able to talk me into
leaving Jacob's side, unconscious or not.

"Go home," Alice ordered. "Talk to Charlie. Flesh out your alibi. Keep him safe."

I stood, and the blood flowed down to my feet, stinging like the pricks of a thousand needles.
I'd been sitting still for a long time.

"That dress is adorable on you," Alice cooed.

"Huh? Oh. Er - thanks again for the clothes," I mumbled out of courtesy rather than real
gratitude.
"You need the evidence," Alice said, her eyes innocent and wide. "What's a shopping trip
without a new outfit? It's very flattering, if I do say so myself."

I blinked, unable to remember what she'd dressed me in. I couldn't keep my thoughts from
skittering away every few seconds, insects running from the light. . . .

"Jacob is fine, Bella," Alice said, easily interpreting my preoccupation. "There's no hurry. If
you realized how much extra morphine Carlisle had to give him - what with his temperature
burning it off so quickly - you would know that he's going to be out for a while."

At least he wasn't in any pain. Not yet.

"Is there anything you want to talk about before you leave?" Alice asked sympathetically.
"You must be more than a little traumatized."

I knew what she was curious about. But I had other questions.

"Will I be like that?" I asked her, my voice subdued. "Like that girl Bree in the meadow?"

There were many things I needed to think of, but I couldn't seem to get her out of my head,
the newborn whose other life was now - abruptly - over. Her face, twisted with desire for my
blood, lingered behind my eyelids.

Alice stroked my arm. "Everyone is different. But something like that, yes."

I was very still, trying to imagine.

"It passes," she promised.

"How soon?"

She shrugged. "A few years, maybe less. It might be different for you. I've never seen anyone
go through this who's chosen it beforehand. It should be interesting to see how that affects
you."

"Interesting," I repeated.

"We'll keep you out of trouble."

"I know that. I trust you." My voice was monotone, dead.

Alice's forehead puckered. "If you're worried about Carlisle and Edward, I'm sure they'll be
fine. I believe Sam is beginning to trust us . . . well, to trust Carlisle, at least. It's a good
thing, too. I imagine the atmosphere got a little tense when Carlisle had to rebreak the
fractures -"

"Please, Alice."
"Sorry."

I took a deep breath to steady myself. Jacob had begun healing too quickly, and some of his
bones had set wrong. He'd been out cold for the process, but it was still hard to think about.

"Alice, can I ask you a question? About the future?"

She was suddenly wary. "You know I don't see everything."

"It's not that, exactly. But you do see my future, sometimes. Why is that, do you think, when
nothing else works on me? Not what Jane can do, or Edward or Aro . . ." My sentence trailed
off with my interest level. My curiosity on this point was fleeting, heavily overshadowed by
more pressing emotions.

Alice, however, found the question very interesting. "Jasper, too, Bella - his talent works on
your body just as well as it does on anyone else's. That's the difference, do you see it? Jasper's
abilities affect the body physically. He really does calm your system down, or excite it. It's
not an illusion. And I see visions of outcomes, not the reasons and thoughts behind the
decisions that create them. It's outside the mind, not an illusion, either; reality, or at least one
version of it. But Jane and Edward and Aro and Demetri - they work inside the mind. Jane
only creates an illusion of pain. She doesn't really hurt your body, you only think you feel it.
You see, Bella? You are safe inside your mind. No one can reach you there. It's no wonder
that Aro was so curious about your future abilities."

She watched my face to see if I was following her logic. In truth, her words had all started to
run together, the syllables and sounds losing their meaning. I couldn't concentrate on them.
Still, I nodded. Trying to look like I got it.

She wasn't fooled. She stroked my cheek and murmured, "He's going to be okay, Bella. I
don't need a vision to know that. Are you ready to go?"

"One more thing. Can I ask you another question about the future? I don't want specifics,
just an overview."

"I'll do my best," she said, doubtful again.

"Can you still see me becoming a vampire?"

"Oh, that's easy. Sure, I do."

I nodded slowly.

She examined my face, her eyes unfathomable. "Don't you know your own mind, Bella?"

"I do. I just wanted to be sure."

"I'm only as sure as you are, Bella. You know that. If you were to change your mind, what I
"see would change . . . or disappear, in your case."

I sighed. "That isn't going to happen, though."

She put her arms around me. "I'm sorry. I can't really empathize. My first memory is of seeing
Jasper's face in my future; I always knew that he was where my life was headed. But I
can sympathize. I'm so sorry you have to choose between two good things."

I shook off her arms. "Don't feel sorry for me." There were people who deserved sympathy. I
wasn't one of them. And there wasn't any choice to make - there was just breaking a good
heart to attend to now. "I'll go deal with Charlie."

I drove my truck home, where Charlie was waiting just as suspiciously as Alice had expected.

"Hey, Bella. How was your shopping trip?" he greeted me when I walked into the kitchen.
He had his arms folded over his chest, his eyes on my face.

"Long," I said dully. "We just got back."

Charlie assessed my mood. "I guess you already heard about Jake, then?"

"Yes. The rest of the Cullens beat us home. Esme told us where Carlisle and Edward were."

"Are you okay?"

"Worried about Jake. As soon as I make dinner, I'm going down to La Push."

"I told you those motorcycles were dangerous. I hope this makes you realize that I wasn't
kidding around."

I nodded as I started pulling things out of the fridge. Charlie settled himself in at the table.
He seemed to be in a more talkative mood than usual.

"I don't think you need to worry about Jake too much. Anyone who can cuss with that kind
of energy is going to recover."

"Jake was awake when you saw him?" I asked, spinning to look at him.

"Oh, yeah, he was awake. You should have heard him - actually, it's better you didn't. I don't
think there was anyone in La Push who couldn't hear him. I don't know where he picked up
that vocabulary, but I hope he hasn't been using that kind of language around you."

"He had a pretty good excuse today. How did he look?"

"Messed up. His friends carried him in. Good thing they're big boys, 'cause that kid's an
armful. Carlisle said his right leg is broken, and his right arm. Pretty much the whole right
side of his body got crushed when he wrecked that damn bike." Charlie shook his head. "If I
ever hear of you riding again, Bella -"
"No problem there, Dad. You won't. Do you really think Jake's okay?"

"Sure, Bella, don't worry. He was himself enough to tease me."

"Tease you?" I echoed in shock.

"Yeah - in between insulting somebody's mother and taking the Lord's name in vain, he said,
'Bet you're glad she loves Cullen instead of me today, huh, Charlie?'"

I turned back to the fridge so that he couldn't see my face.

"And I couldn't argue. Edward's more mature than Jacob when it comes to your safety, I'll
give him that much."

"Jacob's plenty mature," I muttered defensively. "I'm sure this wasn't his fault."

"Weird day today," Charlie mused after a minute. "You know, I don't put much stock in that
superstitious crap, but it was odd. . . . It was like Billy knew something bad was going to
happen to Jake. He was nervous as a turkey on Thanksgiving all morning. I don't think he
heard anything I said to him.

"And then, weirder than that - remember back in February and March when we had all that
trouble with the wolves?"

I bent down to get a frying pan out of the cupboard, and hid there an extra second or two.

"Yeah," I mumbled.

"I hope we're not going to have a problem with that again. This morning, we were out in the
boat, and Billy wasn't paying any attention to me or the fish, when all of a sudden, you could
hear wolves yowling in the woods. More than one, and, boy, was it loud. Sounded like they
were right there in the village. Weirdest part was, Billy turned the boat around and headed
straight back to the harbor like they were calling to him personally. Didn't even hear me ask
what he was doing.

"The noise stopped before we got the boat docked. But all of a sudden Billy was in the
biggest hurry not to miss the game, though we had hours still. He was mumbling some
nonsense about an earlier showing . . . of a live game? I tell you, Bella, it was odd.

"Well, he found some game he said he wanted to watch, but then he just ignored it. He was
on the phone the whole time, calling Sue, and Emily, and your friend Quil's grandpa.
Couldn't quite make out what he was looking for - he just chatted real casual with them.

"Then the howling started again right outside the house. I've never heard anything like it - I
had goose bumps on my arms. I asked Billy - had to shout over the noise - if he'd been setting
traps in his yard. It sounded like the animal was in serious pain."
I winced, but Charlie was so caught up in his story that he didn't notice.

"'Course I forgot all about that till just this minute, 'cause that's when Jake made it home.
One minute it was that wolf yowling, and then you couldn't hear it anymore - Jake's cussing
drowned it right out. Got a set of lungs on him, that boy does."

Charlie paused for a minute, his face thoughtful. "Funny that some good should come out of
this mess. I didn't think they were ever going to get over that fool prejudice they have against
the Cullens down there. But somebody called Carlisle, and Billy was real grateful when he
showed up. I thought we should get Jake up to the hospital, but Billy wanted to keep him
home, and Carlisle agreed. I guess Carlisle knows what's best. Generous of him to sign up for
such a long stretch of house calls."

"And . . ." he paused, as if unwilling to say something. He sighed, and then continued. "And
Edward was really . . . nice. He seemed as worried about Jacob as you are - like that was his
brother lying there. The look in his eyes . . ." Charlie shook his head. "He's a decent guy,
Bella. I'll try to remember that. No promises, though." He grinned at me.

"I won't hold you to it," I mumbled.

Charlie stretched his legs and groaned. "It's nice to be home. You wouldn't believe how
crowded Billy's little place gets. Seven of Jake's friends all squished themselves into that
little front room - I could hardly breathe. Have you ever noticed how big those Quileute kids
all are?"

"Yeah, I have."

Charlie stared at me, his eyes abruptly more focused. "Really, Bella, Carlisle said Jake will be
up and around in no time. Said it looked a lot worse than it was. He's going to be fine."

I just nodded.

Jacob had looked so . . . strangely fragile when I'd hurried down to see him as soon as Charlie
had left. He'd had braces everywhere - Carlisle said there was no point in plaster, as fast as he
was healing. His face had been pale and drawn, deeply unconscious though he was at the
time. Breakable. Huge as he was, he'd looked very breakable. Maybe that had just been my
imagination, coupled with the knowledge that I was going to have to break him.

If only I could be struck by lightning and be split in two. Preferably painfully. For the first
time, giving up being human felt like a true sacrifice. Like it might be too much to lose.

I put Charlie's dinner on the table next to his elbow and headed for the door.

"Er, Bella? Could you wait just a second?"

"Did I forget something?" I asked, eyeing his plate.
"No, no. I just . . . want to ask a favor." Charlie frowned and looked at the floor. "Have a
seat - this won't take long."

I sat across from him, a little confused. I tried to focus. "What do you need, Dad?"

"Here's the gist of it, Bella." Charlie flushed. "Maybe I'm just feeling . . . superstitious after
hanging out with Billy while he was being so strange all day. But I have this . . . hunch. I feel
like . . . I'm going to lose you soon."

"Don't be silly, Dad," I mumbled guiltily. "You want me to go to school, don't you?"

"Just promise me one thing."

I was hesitant, ready to rescind. "Okay . . ."

"Will you tell me before you do anything major? Before you run off with him or something?"

"Dad . . . ," I moaned.

"I'm serious. I won't kick up a fuss. Just give me some advance notice. Give me a chance to
hug you goodbye."

Cringing mentally, I held up my hand. "This is silly. But, if it makes you happy, . . . I
promise."

"Thanks, Bella," he said. "I love you, kid."

"I love you, too, Dad." I touched his shoulder, and then shoved away from the table. "If you
need anything, I'll be at Billy's."

I didn't look back as I ran out. This was just perfect, just what I needed right now. I
grumbled to myself all the way to La Push.

Carlisle's black Mercedes was not in front of Billy's house. That was both good and bad.
Obviously, I needed to talk to Jacob alone. Yet I still wished I could somehow hold Edward's
hand, like I had before, when Jacob was unconscious. Impossible. But I missed Edward - it
had seemed like a very long afternoon alone with Alice. I supposed that made my answer
quite obvious. I already knew that I couldn't live without Edward. That fact wasn't going to
make this any less painful.

I tapped quietly on the front door.

"Come in, Bella," Billy said. The roar of my truck was easy to recognize.

I let myself in.

"Hey, Billy. Is he awake?" I asked.
"He woke up about a half hour ago, just before the doctor left. Go on in. I think he's been
waiting for you."

I flinched, and then took a deep breath. "Thanks."

I hesitated at the door to Jacob's room, not sure whether to knock. I decided to peek first,
hoping - coward that I was - that maybe he'd gone back to sleep. I felt like I could use just a
few more minutes.

I opened the door a crack and leaned hesitantly in.

Jacob was waiting for me, his face calm and smooth. The haggard, gaunt look was gone, but
only a careful blankness took its place. There was no animation in his dark eyes.

It was hard to look at his face, knowing that I loved him. It made more of a difference than I
would have thought. I wondered if it had always been this hard for him, all this time.

Thankfully, someone had covered him with a quilt. It was a relief not to have to see the
extent of the damage.

I stepped in and shut the door quietly behind me.

"Hi, Jake," I murmured.

He didn't answer at first. He looked at my face for a long moment. Then, with some effort,
he rearranged his expression into a slightly mocking smile.

"Yeah, I sort of thought it might be like that." He sighed. "Today has definitely taken a turn
for the worse. First I pick the wrong place, miss the best fight, and Seth gets all the glory.
Then Leah has to be an idiot trying to prove she's as tough as the rest of us and I have to be
the idiot who saves her. And now this." He waved his left hand toward me where I hesitated
by the door.

"How are you feeling?" I mumbled. What a stupid question.

"A little stoned. Dr. Fang isn't sure how much pain medication I need, so he's going with trial
and error. Think he overdid it."

"But you're not in pain."

"No. At least, I can't feel my injuries," he said, smiling mockingly again.

I bit my lip. I was never going to get through this. Why didn't anyone ever try to kill me
when Iwanted to die?

The wry humor left his face, and his eyes warmed up. His forehead creased, like he was
worried.
"How about you?" he asked, sounding really concerned. "Are you okay?"

"Me?" I stared at him. Maybe he had taken too many drugs."Why?"

"Well, I mean, I was pretty sure that he wouldn't actually hurt you, but I wasn't sure how bad
it was going to be. I've been going a little crazy with worrying about you ever since I woke
up. I didn't know if you were going to be allowed to visit or anything. The suspense was
terrible. How did it go? Was he mean to you? I'm sorry if it was bad. I didn't mean for you to
have to go through that alone. I was thinking I'd be there. . . ."

It took me a minute to even understand. He babbled on, looking more and more awkward,
until I got what he was saying. Then I hurried to reassure him.

"No, no, Jake! I'm fine. Too fine, really. Of course he wasn't mean. I wish!"

His eyes widened in what looked like horror."What?"

"He wasn't even mad at me - he wasn't even mad atyou ! He's so unselfish it makes me feel
even worse. I wish he would have yelled at me or something. It's not like I don't deserve . . .
well, much worse that getting yelled at. But he doesn't care. He just wants me to be happy. "

"He wasn't mad?" Jacob asked, incredulous.

"No. He was . . . much too kind."

Jacob stared for another minute, and then he suddenly frowned. "Well, damn !" he growled.

"What's wrong, Jake? Does it hurt?" My hands fluttered uselessly as I looked around for his
medication.

"No," he grumbled in a disgusted tone. "I can't believe this! He didn't give you an ultimatum
or anything?"

"Not even close - what's wrong with you?"

He scowled and shook his head. "I was sort of counting on his reaction. Damn it all. He's
better than I thought."

The way he said it, though angrier, reminded me of Edward's tribute to Jacob's lack of ethics
in the tent this morning. Which meant that Jake was still hoping, still fighting. I winced as
that stabbed deep.

"He's not playing any game, Jake," I said quietly.

"You bet he is. He's playing every bit as hard as I am, only he knows what he's doing and I
don't. Don't blame me because he's a better manipulator than I am - I haven't been around
long enough to learn all his tricks."
"He isn't manipulating me!"

"Yes, he is! When are you going to wake up and realize that he's not a perfect as you think
he is?"

"At least he didn't threaten to kill himself to make me kiss him," I snapped. As soon as the
words were out, I flushed with chagrin. "Wait. Pretend that didn't slip out. I swore to myself
that I wasn't going to say anything about that."

He took a deep breath. When he spoke, he was calmer. "Why not?"

"Because I didn't come here to blame you for anything."

"It's true, though," he said evenly. "I did do that."

"I don't care, Jake. I'm not mad."

He smiled. "I don't care, either. I knew you'd forgive me, and I'm glad I did it. I'd do it again.
At least I have that much. At least I made you see that youdo love me. That's worth
something."

"Is it? Is it really better than if I was still in the dark?"

"Don't you think you ought to know how you feel - just so that it doesn't take you by surprise
someday when it's too late and you're a married vampire?"

I shook my head. "No - I didn't mean better for me. I meant better foryou. Does it make
things better or worse for you, having me know that I'm in love with you? When it doesn't
make a difference either way. Would it have been better, easier for you, if I never clued in?"

He took my question as seriously as I'd meant it, thinking carefully before he answered. "Yes,
it's better to have you know," he finally decided. "If you hadn't figured it out . . . I'd have
always wondered if your decision would have been different if you had. Now I know. I did
everything I could." He dragged in an unsteady breath, and closed his eyes.

This time I did not - could not - resist the urge to comfort him. I crossed the small room and
kneeled by his head, afraid to sit on the bed in case I jostled it and hurt him, and leaned in to
touch my forehead to his cheek.

Jacob sighed, and put his hand on my hair, holding me there.

"I'm so sorry, Jake."

"I always knew this was a long shot. It's not your fault, Bella."

"Not you, too," I moaned. "Please."

He pulled away to look at me. "What?"
"It is my fault. And I'm so sick of being told it's not."

He grinned. It didn't touch his eyes. "You want me to haul you over the coals?"

"Actually . . . I think I do."

He pursed his lips as he measured how much I meant it. A smile flashed across his face
briefly, and then he twisted his expression into a fierce scowl.

"Kissing me back like that was inexcusable." He spit the words at me. "If you knew you were
just going to take it back, maybe you shouldn't have been quite so convincing about it."

I winced and nodded. "I'm so sorry."

"Sorry doesn't make anything better, Bella. What were you thinking?"

"I wasn't," I whispered.

"You should have told me to go die. That's what you want."

"No, Jacob," I whimpered, fighting against the budding tears. "No! Never."

"You're not crying?" he demanded, his voice suddenly back to its normal tone. He twitched
impatiently on the bed.

"Yeah," I muttered, laughing weakly at myself through the tears that were suddenly sobs.

He shifted his weight, throwing his good leg off the bed as if he were going to try to stand.

"What are you doing?" I demanded through the tears. "Lie down, you idiot, you'll hurt
yourself!" I jumped to my feet and pushed his good shoulder down with two hands.

He surrendered, leaning back with a gasp of pain, but he grabbed me around my waist and
pulled me down on the bed, against his good side. I curled up there, trying to stifle the silly
sobs against his hot skin.

"I can't believe you're crying," he mumbled. "You know I just said those things because you
wanted me to. I didn't mean them." His hand rubbed against my shoulders.

"I know." I took a deep, ragged breath, trying to control myself. How did I end up being the
one crying while he did the comforting? "It's all still true, though. Thanks for saying it out
loud."

"Do I get points for making you cry?"

"Sure, Jake." I tried to smile. "As many as you want."

"Don't worry, Bella, honey. It's all going to work out."
"I don't see how," I muttered.

He patted the top of my head. "I'm going to give in and be good."

"More games?" I wondered, tilting my chin so that I could see his face.

"Maybe." He laughed with a bit of effort, and then winced. "But I'm going to try."

I frowned.

"Don't be so pessimistic," he complained. "Give me a little credit."

"What do you mean by 'be good'?"

"I'll be your friend, Bella," he said quietly. "I won't ask for more than that."

"I think it's too late for that, Jake. How can we be friends, when we love each other like
this?"

He looked at the ceiling, his stare intent, as if he were reading something that was written
there. "Maybe . . . it will have to be a long-distance friendship."

I clenched my teeth together, glad he wasn't looking at my face, fighting against the sobs
that threatened to overtake me again. I needed to be strong, and I had no idea how. . . .

"You know that story in the Bible?" Jacob asked suddenly, still reading the blank ceiling.
"The one with the king and the two women fighting over the baby?"

"Sure. King Solomon."

"That's right. King Solomon," he repeated. "And he said, cut the kid in half . . . but it was
only a test. Just to see who would give up their share to protect it."

"Yeah, I remember."

He looked back at my face. "I'm not going to cut you in half anymore, Bella."

I understood what he was saying. He was telling me that he loved me the most, that his
surrender proved it. I wanted to defend Edward, to tell Jacob how Edward would do the
same thing if I wanted, if I would let him. I was the one who wouldn't renounce my claim
there. But there was no point in starting an argument that would only hurt him more.

I closed my eyes, willing myself to control the pain. I couldn't impose that on him.

We were quiet for a moment. He seemed to be waiting for me to say something; I was trying
to think of something to say.

"Can I tell you what the worst part is?" he asked hesitantly when I said nothing. "Do you
mind? Iam going to be good."

"Will it help?" I whispered.

"It might. It couldn't hurt."

"What's the worst part, then?"

"The worse part is knowing what would have been."

"What might have been." I sighed.

"No." Jacob shook his head. "I'm exactly right for you, Bella. It would have been effortless
for us - comfortable, easy as breathing. I was the natural path your life would have taken. . .
." He stared into space for a moment, and I waited. "If the world was the way it was
supposed to be, if there were no monsters and no magic . . ."

I could see what he saw, and I knew that he was right. If the world was the sane place it was
supposed to be, Jacob and I would have been together. And we would have been happy. He
was my soul mate in that world - would have been my soul mate still if his claim had not
been overshadowed by something stronger, something so strong that it could not exist in a
rational world.

Was it out there for Jacob, too? Something that would trump a soul mate? I had to believe
that it was.

Two futures, two soul mates . . . too much for any one person. And so unfair that I wouldn't
be the only one to pay for it. Jacob's pain seemed too high a price. Cringing at the thought of
that price, I wondered if I would have wavered, if I hadn't lost Edward once. If I didn't know
what it was like to live without him. I wasn't sure. That knowledge was so deep a part of me,
I couldn't imagine how I would feel without it.

"He's like a drug for you, Bella." His voice was still gentle, not at all critical. "I see that you
can't live without him now. It's too late. But I would have been healthier for you. Not a drug;
I would have been the air, the sun."

The corner of my mouth turned up in a wistful half-smile. "I used to think of you that way,
you know. Like the sun. My personal sun. You balanced out the clouds nicely for me."

He sighed. "The clouds I can handle. But I can't fight with an eclipse."

I touched his face, laying my hand against his cheek. He exhaled at my touch and closed his
eyes. It was very quiet. For a minute I could hear the beating of his heart, slow and even.

"Tell me the worst part for you," he whispered.

"I think that might be a bad idea."
"Please."

"I think it will hurt."

"Please."

How could I deny him anything at this point?

"The worst part . . ." I hesitated, and then let words spill out in a flood of truth. "The worst
part is that I saw the whole thing - our whole life. And I want it bad, Jake, I want it all. I
want to stay right here and never move. I want to love you and make you happy. And I can't,
and it's killing me. It's like Sam and Emily, Jake - I never had a choice. I always knew
nothing would change. Maybe that's why I was fighting against you so hard."

He seemed to be concentrating on breathing evenly.

"I knew I shouldn't have told you that."

He shook his head slowly. "No. I'm glad you did. Thank you." He kissed the top of my head,
and then he sighed. "I'll be good now."

I looked up, and he was smiling.

"So you're going to get married, huh?"

"We don't have to talk about that."

"I'd like to know some of the details. I don't know when I'll talk to you again."

I had to wait for a minute before I could speak. When I was pretty sure that my voice
wouldn't break, I answered his question.

"It's not really my idea . . . but, yes. It means a lot to him. I figure, why not?"

Jake nodded. "That's true. It's not such a big thing - in comparison."

His voice was very calm, very practical. I stared at him, curious about how he was managing,
and that ruined it. He met my eyes for a second, and then twisted his head away. I waited to
speak until his breathing was under control.

"Yes. In comparison," I agreed.

"How long do you have left?"

"That depends on how long it takes Alice to pull a wedding together." I suppressed a groan,
imagining what Alice would do.

"Before or after?" he asked quietly.
I knew what he meant. "After."

He nodded. This was a relief to him. I wondered how many sleepless nights the thought of
my graduation had given him.

"Are you scared?" he whispered.

"Yes," I whispered back.

"What are you afraid of?" I could barely hear his voice now. He stared down at my hands.

"Lots of things." I worked to make my voice lighter, but I stayed honest. "I've never been
much of a masochist, so I'm not looking forward to the pain. And I wish there was some way
to keep him away - I don't want him to suffer with me, but I don't think there's any way
around it. There's dealing with Charlie, too, and Renée. . . . And then afterward, I hope I'll be
able to control myself soon. Maybe I'll be such a menace that the pack will have to take me
out."

He looked up with a disapproving expression. "I'd hamstring any one of my brothers who
tried."

"Thanks."

He smiled halfheartedly. Then he frowned. "But isn't it more dangerous than that? In all of
the stories, they say it's too hard . . . they lose control . . . people die. . . ." He gulped.

"No, I'm not afraid of that. Silly Jacob - don't you know better than to believe vampire
stories?"

He obviously didn't appreciate my attempt at humor.

"Well, anyway, lots to worry about. But worth it, in the end."

He nodded unwillingly, and I knew that he in no way agreed with me.

I stretched my neck up to whisper in his ear, laying my cheek against his warm skin. "You
know I love you."

"I know," he breathed, his arm tightening automatically around my waist. "You know how
much I wish it was enough."

"Yes."

"I'll always be waiting in the wings, Bella," he promised, lightening his tone and loosening
his arm. I pulled away with a dull, dragging sense of loss, feeling the tearing separation as I
left a part of me behind, there on the bed next to him. "You'll always have that spare option
if you want it."
I made an effort to smile. "Until my heart stops beating."

He grinned back. "You know, I think maybe I'd still take you - maybe. I guess that depends
on how much you stink."

"Should I come back to see you? Or would you rather I didn't?"

"I'll think it through and get back to you," he said. "I might need the company to keep from
going crazy. The vampire surgeon extraordinaire says I can't phase until he gives the okay - it
might mess up the way the bones are set." Jacob made a face.

"Be good and do what Carlisle tells you to do. You'll get well faster."

"Sure, sure."

"I wonder when it will happen," I said. "When the right girl is going to catch your eye."

"Don't get your hopes up, Bella." Jacob's voice was abruptly sour. "Though I'm sure it would
be a relief for you."

"Maybe, maybe not. I probably won't think she's good enough for you. I wonder how jealous
I'll be."

"That part might be kind of fun," he admitted.

"Let me know if you want me to come back, and I'll be here," I promised.

With a sigh, he turned his cheek toward me.

I leaned in and kissed his face softly. "Love you, Jacob."

He laughed lightly. "Love you more."

He watched me walk out of his room with an unfathomable expression in his black eyes.
