The man was called Calvin Franz and the helicopter was a Bell 222. Franz had two broken legs, so he had to be loaded on board strapped to a stretcher. Not a difficult manoeuvre. The Bell was a roomy aircraft, twin-engined, designed for corporate travel and police departments, with space for seven passengers. The rear doors were as big as a panel van’s and they opened wide. The middle row of seats had been removed. There was plenty of room for Franz on the floor.
The helicopter was idling. Two men were carrying the stretcher. They ducked low under the rotor wash and hurried, one backward, one forward. When they reached the open door the guy who had been walking backward got one handle up on the sill and ducked away. The other guy stepped forward and shoved hard and slid the stretcher all the way inside. Franz was awake and hurting. He cried out and jerked around a little, but not much, because the straps across his chest and thighs were buckled tight. The two men climbed in after him and got in their seats behind the missing row and slammed the doors.
Then they waited. 
The pilot waited.
A third man came out of a grey door and walked across the concrete. He bent low under the rotor and held a hand flat on his chest to stop his necktie whipping in the wind. The gesture made him look like a guilty man proclaiming his innocence. He tracked around the Bell’s long nose and got in the forward seat, next to the pilot.
‘Go’, he said, and then he bent his head to concentrate on his harness buckle.
The pilot goosed the turbines and the lazy whop-whop of the idling blade slid up the scale to an urgent centripetal whip-whip-whip and then disappeared behind the treble blast of the exhaust. The Bell lifted straight off the ground, drifted left a little, rotated slightly, and then retracted its wheels and climbed a thousand feet. Then it dipped its nose and hammered north, high and fast. Below it roads and science parks and small factories and neat isolated suburban communities slid past. Brick walls and metal siding blazed this election red in the late sun. Tiny emerald lawns and turquoise swimming pools winked in the last of the light.
The man in the forward seat said, ‘you know where we're going?’
Pilot nodded and said nothing. 
The Bell clattered onward, turning east of north, climbing a little higher, heading for darkness. It crossed a highway far below, a river of white lights crawling West and red lights crawling east. A minute north of the highway the last developed acres gave way to low hills, barren and scrubby and uninhabited. They glowed orange on the slopes that faced the setting sun and showed dull tan in the valleys and the shadows. Then the low hills gave way in turn to small rounded mountains. The Bell sped on, rising and falling, following the controls below. The man in the forward seat twisted around and looked down at Franz on the floor behind him. Smiled briefly and said, ‘20 more minutes, maybe.’
Franz didn't reply. He was in too much pain.
The Bell was rated for a 161-mph cruise, so 20 more minutes took it almost fifty-four miles, beyond the mountains, well out over the empty desert. The pilot flared the nose and slowed a little. The man in the forward seat pressed his forehead against the window and stared down into the darkness.
‘Where are we?’, He asked.
The pilot said, ‘where we were before.’ 
‘Exactly?’
‘Roughly.’
‘What's below us now?’
‘Sand.’
‘Height?’
‘Three thousand feet.’
‘What's the air like up here?’
‘Still. A few thermals, but no wind.’
‘Safe?’
‘Aeronautically.’
‘So let's do it.’
The pilot slowed more and turned and came to a stationary hover, three thousand feet above the desert floor. The man in the forward seat twisted around again and signalled to the two guys way in back. Both unlocked their safety harnesses. One crouched forward, avoiding Franz’s feet, and held his loose harness tight in one hand and unlatched the door with the other. The pilot was half turned in his own seat, watching, and he tilted the Bell a little so the door fell all the way open under its own weight. Then he brought the craft level again and put it into a slow clockwise rotation that the motion and air pressure held the door wide. The second guy from the rear crouched near Franz’s head and jacked the stretcher upward to a forty-five-degree slope. The first guy jammed his shoe against the free end of the stretcher rail to stop the whole thing sliding across the floor. The second guy jerked like a weightlifter and brought the stretcher almost vertical. Franz sagged down against the straps. He was a big guy, and heavy. And determined. His legs were useless but his upper body was powerful and straining hard. His head was snapping from side to side.
The first guy took out a gravity knife and popped the blade. Used it to saw through the strap around Franz’s thighs. Then he paused a beat and sliced the strap around Franz’s chest. One quick motion. At the exact same time the second guy jerked the stretcher fully upright. Franz took an involuntary step forward. Onto his broken right leg. He screamed once, briefly, and then took a second instinctive step. Onto his broken left leg. His arms flailed and he collapsed forward and his upper body momentum levered him over the locked pivot of his immobile hips and took him straight out through the open door, into the noisy darkness, into the gale-force rotor wash, into the night.
Three thousand feet above the desert floor.
For a moment there was silence. Even the engine noise seemed to fade. Then the pilot reversed the Bell’s rotation and rocked the other way and the door slammed neatly shut. The turbines span up again and the rotor bit the air and the noise dropped.
The two guys clambered back to their seats.
The man in the front said, ‘let's go home now.’
O'Donnell said, ‘we’re nowhere at all,’ and Neagley said, ‘we need to face facts. The trail is stone cold and we have virtually no useful data.’
They were in Karla Dixon's bedroom. Leonardo diCaprio's old crib. The bed was made. Reacher and Dixon were showered and dressed and their hair was dry. They were standing well apart from one another. The seven spreadsheets were laid out on the dresser with the diary next to them. No one disputed that they represented the last seven calendar months. But no one saw how that information helped them, either. 
Dixon looked at Reacher and asked, ‘we're missing something. We're not thinking straight. We should take a break and come back to it.’
‘We never used to take breaks.’
‘We used to have five more pairs of eyes.’
The man in the dark blue suit called it in: ‘they moved to the Chateau Mormont. And there's four of them now. Karla Dixon showed up. So they’re all present and correct and accounted for.’ Then he listened to his bosses reply, and pictured him smoothing his tie over the front of his shirt.
Rachel went for a walk on Sunset, alone. Solitude was still his natural condition. He took his money out of his pocket and counted it. Not much left. He ducked into a souvenir store and found a rail of discounted shirts. Last year’s styles. Or the last decade’s. On one end of the rail was a bunch of blue items with white patterns, shiny, some kind of a man-made material. Spread collars, short sleeves, square hems. He picked one out. It was like something his father might have worn to go bowling in the 1950s. Except three sizes larger. Richard was much bigger than his father had been. He found a mirror and jammed the hanger up under his chin. The shirt looked like it might fit him. It was probably wide enough in the shoulders. The short sleeves would solve the problem of trying to find something to accommodate the length of his arms. His arms were like a gorilla’s, only longer and thicker.
With tax the garment cost nearly twenty-one dollars. Reacher paid the guy at the register and then bit off the tags and stripped off his old shirt and put the new one on right then and there. Left it untucked. Tugged it down at the bottom and rolled his shoulders. With the top button open it fit pretty well. The sleeves were tight around his biceps but not so bad that his blood flow was imperilled.
‘Got a trash can?’ He asked.
The guy ducked down and came back with a round metal canister lined with a white plastic bag. Reacher balled up his old shirt and tossed it in.
‘Barbershop near here?’ He asked.
‘Two blocks north.’ The guy said. ‘Up the hill. Shoeshines and haircuts in the corner of the grocery store.’
Reacher said nothing.
‘Laurel Canyon,’ the guy said, like an explanation.
The grocery store sold beer out of ice chests and coffee out of press-top flasks. Reacher took a medium cup of house blend, black, and headed for the barber's chair. It was an old-fashioned thing covered in red speckled vinyl. There were straight razors on the sink and a shoeshine chair nearby. A thin guy in a white wife-beater was sitting in it. He had needle tracks up and down his arms. He looked up and concentrated, like he was assessing the size of the task ahead of him.
‘Let me guess,’ he said. ‘Shave and a haircut?’
‘Two bits?’ Reacher said.
‘Eight dollars,’ the guy said.
Reacher checked his pocket again.
‘Ten,’ he said. ‘To include a shoeshine and the coffee.’
‘That all would be twelve.’
‘Ten is what I've got.’
The guy shrugged and said, ‘whatever.’
Laurel Canyon, Reacher thought. Thirty minutes later he was down to his last dollar but his shoes were clean and his face was as smooth as it had ever been. His head was shaved almost as close. He had asked for a standard army buzz cut but the guy had given him something a whole lot closer to the Marine Corps version. Clearly not a veteran. Reacher paused a beat and checked the guy’s arms again.
He asked, ‘where can a person score around here?’
‘You're not a user,’ the guy said.
‘For a friend.’
‘You don't have any money.’
‘I can get some.’
The guy in the wife-beater shrugged and said, ‘there's usually a crew behind the wax museum.’
Reacher up walked back to the hotel by staying in the low canyon streets for two blocks and then coming on it from the rear. Along the way he passed a dark blue Chrysler 300C parked on the kerb. A guy in a dark blue suit was behind the wheel. The suit matched the sheet metal, more or less exactly. The engine was off and the guy was just waiting. Reacher assumed it was a livery car. A limo. He figured some enterprising car service owner had gotten a better price in the Chrysler dealership then the Lincoln dealership and has switched away from Town Cars. Figured he had dressed the drivers in matching suits, looking for an edge. Reaching new the LA was a tough market, in the limousine business. He had read about it somewhere.
Dixon and Neagley were polite about his new shirt but O'Donnell laughed at it. They all laughed at his haircut. Reacher didn't care. He caught sight of it in Dixon's spotted old mirror and had to agree it was a little extreme. It was a real whitewall. And he was happy to provide a moment of levity. They weren't going to get any light relief anyplace else, that was for sure. Together they had handled two years’ worth of crimes, some of them gruesome, some of the merely venal, some of them cruel, some of them appalling, and they had joked their way through like cops everywhere. Black humour. The universal refuge. One time they had found a partially decomposed dead guy with a gardening shovel buried in what was left of his head and immediately rechristened the corpse Doug and laughed like drains. Later in a court martial proceeding Stan Lowrey had slipped and used the nickname instead of the real name. A JAG Defender hadn't understood the reference. Lowrey had laughed all over again on the witness stand and said, like, dug? Shovel in his head? Get it?
No one was laughing now. It was different when it was your own.
Spreadsheets were back on the bed. One-hundred and eighty-three days over a seven-month span. A total of 2,197 events. There was a new page next to them in Dixon's handwriting. She had extrapolated the numbers out to three hundred and fourteen days and 3,766 events in a complete year. Reacher guessed she had invited the others to brainstorm about what kind of a thing happens 3,766 times over three hundred and fourteen days in a year. But the rest of the page was blank. Nobody had come up with anything. The sheet with the five names was on the pillow. It was lying at a careless angle, like someone had been studying it and then thrown it down in frustration.
‘There must be more than this.’ O'Donnell said.
‘What exactly do you want?’ Reacher said back. ‘Cliff Notes?’
‘I'm saying there isn't enough here for four people to have died for it.’
Reacher nodded.
‘I agree,’ he said. ‘It ain't much. Because the bad guys got practically everything. His computers, his Rolodex, his client list, his phone book. Or we've got is a tip of the iceberg. Fragments. Like archaeological remains. But we better get used to it, because this kind of thing is all we’re ever going to get.’
‘So what do we do?’
‘Break the habit.’
‘What habit?’
‘Asking me what to do. I might not be here tomorrow. I imagine those deputies are gearing up right now. You're going to have to start thinking for yourselves.’
‘Until then what do we do?’
Reacher ignored the question. Turned instead to Karla Dixon and asked, ‘when you rented your car, did you get the extra insurance?’
She nodded.
‘OK,’ Reacher said. ‘Take another break. Then we'll go get some dinner. My treat. Maybe like the Last Supper. I'll meet you in the lobby in an hour.’
Reacher got Dixon’s Ford from the valets and drove east on Hollywood Boulevard. He passed the Entertainment Museum and Mann's Chinese Theatre. Made the left on Highland. He was two blocks west of Hollywood and Vine, which was where the bad stuff seemed to have migrated, which was usually the way. Law enforcement never really won. It just shoved stuff around, a block here, a block there,
Reacher pulled into the kerb. There was a wide alley behind the wax museum. Really a vacant half-lot, gravel surface, unfenced, colonized by cars into a turning loop, recolonized by dealers into a drive-through facility. The operation was organized in the conventional triangulated manner. A buyer would drive in and slow up. A kid not more than eleven years old would approach. The driver would place his order ad hand over his cash. The kid would run the cash to the bag man and then continue to a stash man and pick up the product. Meanwhile the driver would be crawling through a slow half-circle, ready to meet the kid again on the other side of the lot. Whereupon the transfer would be made and the driver would leave. The kid would run back to where he began and wait to start all over again.
A smart system. Complete separation of product and money, easy instant dispersal in three different directions if necessary, and no one was seen with anything except someone way too young to be prosecuted. The stash would be refreshed often, leaving the stash man holding the bare minimum at any one time. The cash bag would be emptied frequently, reducing potential losses and the bag man’s vulnerability.
A smart system.
A system Reacher had seen before.
A system he had exploited before.
The bag man was literally a bad man. He was sitting on a concrete block in the middle of the lot with a black vinyl duffel at his feet. He was wearing sunglasses and would be armed with whatever was the handgun of choice that week.
Reacher waited.
A black Mercedes ML slowed and pulled into the lot. A pretty SUV, tinted windows, California vanity plates spelling out an acronym Reacher didn't understand. It paused at the entry and the kid ran up. His head barely reached the driver's window. But his hand did. It snaked up and came back down with a folded wad. The Mercedes eased forward and the kid ran over to the bag man. The word went into the bag and the kid headed for the stash man. The Mercedes was beginning to turn it slow half-circle.
Reacher put Dixon’s Ford in gear. Checked north, checked south. Hit the gas and turn the wheel and slammed into the lot. Ignore the warning circular path and aimed straight for the centre of the space.
Straight for the bag man, accelerating, front wheels spraying gravel.
The bag man froze.
Ten feet before hitting him head-on Reacher did three things. He twitched the wheel. He stamped on the break. And he opened his door. The car slewed right and the front wheels washed into the loose stones and the door swung out through a moving arc and caught the guy like a full-on punch. It smacked him solidly from his waist up to his face. He went over backward and the car stopped dead and Reacher leaned down and grabbed the vinyl duffel left-handed from the floor. Pitched it into the passenger seat and hit the gas and slammed his door shut and pulled a tight U-turn inside the slow Mercedes. Roared back out of the lot I'm bounced over the curb onto Highland. In the mirror he saw dust in the air and confusion and the bag man flat on his back and two guys running. Ten yards later he was behind the bulk of the wax museum. Then he was through the light, back on Hollywood Boulevard.
Twelve seconds, beginning to end.
No reaction. No gun shots. No pursuit.
Nor would there be any, Reacher guessed. They would have clocked the plain-vanilla Ford an the appalling shirt and the short hair and put it down to an LAPD freelance looking to supplement his pension fund. The cost of doing business. And the Mercedes driver couldn't afford to say a word to anyone.
Yeah baby, you do not mess with the special investigators.
Richa slowed and caught his breath and made a right and drove a complete counterclockwise scenic circle. Nichols Canyon Road, Woodrow Wilson Drive, and back on Laurel Canyon Boulevard. Nobody was behind him. He stopped on a deserted hairpin up high and emptied the bag and ditched it on the shoulder. Then he counted the money. Close to nine hundred dollars, mostly in twenties and tens. Enough for dinner. Even with Norwegian water. And a tip.
He got out and checked the car. The driver's door was a little dented, right in the centre. The bad man's face. No blood. He got back in and buckled up. Ten minutes later he was in the Chateau Marmont’s lobby, sitting in a faded velvet arm chair, waiting for the others.
Twelve hundred miles northeast of the Chateau Marmont the dark-haired forty-year-old Calling himself Alan Mason was riding the underground train from his arrival gate to the Denver airport's main terminal. He was alone in the car, sitting down, tired, but smiling all the same at the crazy bursts of the jug-band music that preceded the station announcements. He figured they had been specified by a psychologist to reduce travel stress. In which case they were working. He felt fine. A lot more relaxed than he had any right to be.
Curtis Mauney didn't wait to be asked. He raised the lid of his briefcase again and took out another clear plastic page protector. In it was a copy of a still frame from a black and white surveillance tape. Four men, shoulder to shoulder in front of some kind of store counter. Upside down and from a distance Reacher couldn't make out much detail.
Mauney said, ‘I made the ID's by comparing a bunch of old snapshots from a shoebox in Franz’s bedroom closet.’ Then he passed the photograph to his right, to Neagley. She studied it for a moment, nothing in her face except light reflected off the shiny plastic. She passed it counterclockwise to Dixon. Dixon looked at it for ten long seconds and blinked once and passed it to O'Donnell. A Donald took it and studied it and shook his head and passed it to Reacher.
Manuel Orozco was on the left of the frame, glancing to his right, caught by the camera in his perpetual state of restlessness. Then came Calvin Franz, hands in his pockets, patience on his face. Then came Tony Swan, front and centre, looking straight ahead. On the right was Jorge Sanchez, in a buttoned-up shirt, no tie, with a finger hooked under his collar. Reacher knew that pose. He had seen it a thousand times before. It meant that Sanchez had shaved about ten hours previously, and the stubble on his throat was growing back and beginning to irritate him. Even without the time code burned into the lower right of the shot Reacher would have known he was looking at a picture taken early in the evening.
They all looked a little older. Orozco’s hair was grey at the temples and his eyes were lined and weary. Franz had maybe lost a little weight. Some of the muscle was gone from his shoulders. Swan was as wide as ever, barrel-chested, thicker in the gut. His hair was short and had crept backward maybe half an inch. Sanchez’s scowl has settled into a tracery of permanent down-turned lines running from his nose to his chin and framing his mouth.
Older, but maybe a little wiser, too. There was a lot of talent and experience and capability right there in the picture. And an easy camaraderie and a mutual trust still floating on a recent renewal. Four tough guys. In Reacher’s opinion, four of the best eight in the world.
Who or what had beaten them?
Behind them, running away from the camera, were narrow store aisles that looked familiar.
‘Where is this?’ Reacher asked.
Mauney said, ‘the pharmacy in Culver City. Next to Franz’s office. The guy behind the counter remembered them. Swan was buying aspirin.’
‘That doesn't sound like Swan.’
‘For his dog. It had arthritis in its hips. He gave it a quarter-tab of aspirin a day. The pharmacist said that's a pretty common practise with dogs. Especially big dogs.’
‘How much aspirin did he buy?’
‘The economy bottle. Ninety-six pills, generic.’
Dixon said, ‘at a quarter-tab a day, that's a year and nineteen days worth.’
Reacher looked at the picture again. Four guys, relaxed poses, no urgency, all the time in the world, a routine purchase, a provision on behalf of a pet animal designed to stretch more than a year into the future.
They never even saw it coming.
Who or what had beaten them?
‘Can I keep this picture?’ He asked.
‘Why?’ Mauney said. ‘You see something in it?’
‘Four of my old friends.’
Mauney nodded. ‘So keep it. It's a copy.’
‘What next?’
‘Stay here,’ Mauney said. He dropped the lid of his case and clicked the latches, loud in the silence. ‘Stay visible, and call me if you see anyone sniffing around. No more independent action, OK?’
‘We're just here for the funeral,’ Reacher said.
‘But whose funeral?’
Richa didn't reply to that. You stood up and turn and look at Raquel Welch’s picture again. The glass in the frame was reflective and behind him he saw Mauney getting out of his chair, and the others standing up with him. When a seated person stands up, he slides forward to do it, say that when a seated group stands up they all end up temporarily closer to one another then they were when they were sitting down. Therefore their next communal move is to shuffle backward, turning, dispersing, widening the circle, respecting space. Neagley was the first and fastest, of course. Mauney turned toward the door and set himself to thread through the limited space between the chairs. O'Donnell stepped the other way, toward the interior of the hotel. Dixon paralleled him, small, left, nimble, side-stepping a coffee table.
But Thomas Brant moved the other way.
Inward.
Reacher kept his eye on the glass in front of Raquel. Watched Brant’s turn reflection. He knew instantly what was going to happen. Brant was going to tap him on his right shoulder with his left hand. Whereupon Reacher was supposed to turn enquiringly and take a massive straight right to the face.
Brant step closer. Reacher focused on the gold ring between the two halves of Raquel's bikini top. Brant’s left hand snaked forward and his right hand eased back. His left hand had the index finger extended and his right hand was bunched into a fist the size of a softball. Good but not great technique. Reacher sensed that Brant’s feet were not perfectly placed. Brant was a brawler, not a fighter. He was hobbling himself about 50 per cent,
Brant tapped Reacher on the shoulder.
Because he was expecting it Reacher turned much faster than he might have done and caught the incoming straight right in his left palm a foot in front of his face. Like snaring a line drive barehanded in the infield. It was a hefty blow. A lot of weight behind it. It made a hell of a smack. It stung Reacher’s palm all the way down to the tendons.
Then it was all about the superhuman self-control.
Every ounce of Reacher’s animal instinct and muscle memory dictated a head butt to Brant’s damaged nose. It was a no-brainer. Use the adrenalin. Jerk forward from the waist, plenty of snap, bury that forehead deep. A move that Reacher has perfected at the age of five. A reaction that was almost mandatory a lifetime later.
But Reacher held off.
He just stood still, gripping Brant’s bunched fist. He looked into Brant’s eye’s, breathed out, and shook his head. 
‘I apologized once,’ he said. ‘And I’m apologizing again, right now. It that’s not good enough for you, then wait until after this is all over, OK? I’ll stick around. You can get a couple of buddies and jumped me three on one when I’m not looking for it. That’s fair, right?’
‘Maybe I’ll do that,’ Brant said.
‘You should. But choose your buddies carefully. Don’t pick anyone who can’t afford six months in hospital.’
‘Tough guy.’
‘I ain’t the one wearing the splint here.’
Curtis Mauney came over and said, ‘No fighting. Not now, not ever.’ He hauled Brant away by the collar. Reacher waited until they were both out the door and then grimaced and shook his left hand wildly and said, ‘Damn, that stings.’
‘Put some ice on it,’ Neagley said.
‘Wrap it around a cold beer,’ O’Donnell said. 
‘Get over it and let me tell you about the number six hundred and fifty,’ Dixon said.
Neagley insisted on making the call to Diana Bond alone. When they got back to the hotel she parked herself in a far corner of the lobby and did a whole lot of dialling and redialling. Then some serious talking. She came back a long twenty minutes later. Slight distaste on her face. Slight discomfort in her body language. But a measure of excitement, too.
‘Took me some time to track her down,’ she said. ‘Turns our she’s not far away. She’s up at Edwards Air Force Base for a few days. Some big presentation.’
O’Donnell said, ‘That’s why your guy said call her soonest. He knew she was in California. Every word counts.’
‘What did she say?’ Reacher asked.
‘She’s coming down here,’ Neagley said. ‘She wants to meet face to face.’
‘Really?’ Reacher said. ‘When?’
‘Just as soon as she can get away.’
‘That’s impressive.’
‘You bet your ass it is. Little Wing must be important.’
‘Feel bad about the call?’
Neagley nodded. ‘I feel bad about everything.’
They went up to Neagley’s room and looked at maps and figured out Diana Bond’s earliest possible arrival time. Edwards was on the other side of the San Gabriel Mountains, out in the Mojave, about seventy miles north and east, past Palmdale and Lancaster, about halfway to Fort Irwin. A two-hour wait, minimum, if Bond got away immediately. Longer if she didn’t.
‘I’m going for a walk,’ Reacher said.
O’Donnell said, ‘I’ll come with you.’
They headed east on Sunset again to where West Hollywood met regular Hollywood. It was early afternoon and Reacher felt the sun burning his head through his shaved hair. It was like the rays had extra intensity after bouncing around through glittering particles of air pollution.
‘I should buy a hat,’ he said.
‘You should buy a better shirt,’ O’Donnell said. ‘You can afford one now.’
‘Maybe I will.’
They saw a store they had passes on the way to Tower Records. It was some kind of popular chain. It had an artfully pale and uncrowded window, but it wasn’t expansive. It sold cotton stuff, jeans, chinos, shirts and T-shirts. And ball caps. They were brand new but looked like they ha been worn and washed a thousand times already. Reacher picked one out, blue, no writing on it. he never brought anything with writing in it. he had spent too long in uniform. Name tapes and badges and alphabet soup all over him for thirteen years.
He loosened the strap at the back of the cap and tried it on.
‘What do you think?’ he asked.
O’Donnell said, ‘Find a mirror.’
‘Doesn’t matter what I see in a mirror. You’re the one laughing at how I look.’
‘It’s a nice hat.’
Reacher kept it on and moved across the store to a low table piled high with T-shirts. In the centre of the table was a mannequin torso wearing two of them, one under the other, pale green and dark green. The underneath shirt showed at the hem and the sleeves and the collar. Together the two layers were reassuringly thick and hefty.
Reacher asked, ‘What do you think?’
‘It’s a look,’ O’Donnell said.
‘Do they need to be different sizes?’
‘Probably not.’
Reacher picked out a light blue and a dark blue, both XXLs. He took off the hat and carried the three items to the register. Refused a bag and bit off the tags and stripped off his bowling shirt right there in the middle of the store. Stood and waited naked to the waist in the chill of the air conditioning.
‘Got a trash can?’ he asked.
The girl behind the counter bent down and came back with a plastic item with a liner. Reacher tossed his old shirt in and put his new shirts on, one after the other. Tugged back to the them around and rolled his shoulders to get them comfortable and jammed the cap on his head. Then he headed back to the street. Turned east.
O’Donnell asked, ‘What are you running from?’
‘I’m not running from anything.’
‘You could have kept the old shirt.’
‘Slippery slope,’ Reacher said. ‘I carry a spare shirt, pretty soon I’m carrying spare pants. Then I’d need a suitcase. Next thing I know, I’ve got a house and a car and a savings plan and I’m filling out all kinds of forms.’
‘People do that.’
‘Not me.’
‘So like I said, what are you running from?’
‘From being like people, I guess.’
‘I’m like people. I’ve got a house and a car and a savings plan. I fill out forms.’
‘Whatever works for you.’
‘Do you think I’m ordinary?’
Reacher nodded, ‘In that respect.’
‘Not everybody can be like you.’
‘That’s ass-backward. The fact is few of us can’t be like you.’
‘You want to be?’
‘It’s not about wanting. It just can’t be done.’
‘Why not?’
‘OK, I’m running.’
‘From what? Being like me?’
‘From being different then I used to be.’
‘We’re all different than we used to be.’
‘We don’t all have to like it.’
‘I don’t like it,’ O’Donnell said. ‘But I deal with it.’
Reacher nodded, ‘You’re doing great, Dave. I mean it. It’s me that I worry about. I’ve been looking at you and Neagley and Karla and feeling like a loser.’
‘Really?’
‘Look at me.’
‘All that we’ve got that you don’t is suitcases.’
‘But what have I got that you don’t?’
O’Donnell didn’t answer. They turned north on Vine , middle of the afternoon in America’s second largest city, and saw two guts with pistols in their hands jumping out of a moving car. 
Wright hurried over to them when they came in and led them away to the same quite corner of the lobby that they had used before.
‘Azhari Mahmoud isn’t in any Las Vegas hotel,’ he said. ‘That’s definitive. Also negative on Andrew MacBride and Anthony Matthews.’
Reacher nodded.
‘Thanks for checking,’ he said.
Wright said, ‘And I made a few panic calls to my opposite numbers. Better that then lying awake all night, worrying. And you know what I found? You guys are completely full of shit. No way is this town down sixty-five million dollars in the last four months. It just isn’t happening.’
‘Can you be sure?’
Wright nodded. ‘We all ran emergency cash flow audits. And there’s nothing going on. The usual bits and pieces, that’s all, nothing else. I’m going to send you my Prozac bill. I practically overdosed tonight.’
They found a bar off the lobby and brought each other beers and sat in a line in front of four idle slots. Reacher’s was simulating a big jackpot win, over and over again, like a tempting advertisement. Four reels were clicking to a stop on four cherries and lights were flashing and strobing and chasing themselves all over the front. Four reels, eight symbols on each. Astronomical odds, even without the microprocessor’s covert intervention. Reacher tried to calculate the tonnage of quarters a player would need to get through before he could expect his first win. But he didn’t know exactly how much a quarter weighed. Some small fraction of an ounce, obviously, which would add up fast. Tendon damage would be involved, muscle strain, repetitive stress injury. He wondered if casino owners had stock in orthopaedic clinics. Probably.
Dixon said, ‘Wright already figured it would have to be industrial =-scale scamming. He came right out and said so. Dealers, pit bosses, security guys, cameras, tapes, cashiers. It’s not much more of a leap to imagine that apparent cash flow could be massaged. They could have installed a phony program that makes everything look kosher for as long as they need it to. It’s exactly what I would do.’
Reacher asked, ‘When would they find out?’
‘When they do their books at the end of their financial year. By that point the money is either there or it’s not.’
‘How would Sanchez and Orozco find out ahead of that?’
‘Maybe they tapped in lower down the food chain and extrapolated backward.’
‘Who would need to be involved?’
‘Key people.’
‘Like Wright himself?’
‘Possibly,’ Dixon said. 
O’Donnell said, ‘We talked to him and a half-hour later someone was trying to shoot us in the back.’
‘We need to find Sanchez’s friend,’ Neagley said. ‘Before someone else does.’
‘We can’t,’ Reacher said. ‘No bar is going to give out a girl’s address to a bunch of complete strangers.’
‘We could tell them she’s in danger.’
‘Like they haven’t heard that before.’
‘Some other way,’ Dixon said. ‘The UPS thing.’
‘We don’t have her second name.’
‘So what do we do?’
‘We suck it up and wait for morning.’
‘Should we move hotels? If Wright could be a bad guy?’
‘No point. He’ll have buddies all over town. Just lock your door.’
Reacher followed his own advice when he got back to his room. He clicked the security lever and put the chain on. No real defence against a determined opponent, but it would buy a second or two, and a second or two was generally all that Reacher needed.
He put the Hardballer in the bedside drawer. Put his clothes under the mattress to press and took a long hot shower. Then he started thinking about Karla Dixon. 
She was alone.
Maybe she didn’t like that.
Maybe she would appreciate a little safety in numbers. He wrapped a towel around his waist and padded over to the phone. But before he got to it there was a knock at his door. He changed course. Ignored the peephole. He didn’t like to put his eye to the glass undefended. Easiest thing in the world for an assailant in the corridor to wait for the lens to darken and then fire a large-calibre handgun straight through it. Such a move would make hell of a mess. The bullet, plus shards and fragments of glass and steel, all of them through the eye and into the brain and out the back of the skull. Peepholes were a very bad idea, in Reacher’s opinion.
He took off the chain and undid the extra lock. Opened the door.
Karla Dixon.
She was still fully dressed. She would be, he guessed, for a walk through the corridors and a ride in the elevator. Black suit, no shirt.
‘Can I come in?’ she said.
‘I was just about to call you,’ Reacher said.
‘Right.’
‘I was on my way to the phone.’
‘Why?’
‘Lonely.’
‘You?’
‘Me for sure. You, I hoped.’
He held the door wide. She came in. within a minute he discovered a shirt wasn’t the only thing she wasn’t wearing under the suit.
Neagley called on the bedside phone at nine thirty in the morning.
‘Dixon’s not in her room,’ she said.
‘Maybe she’s working out,’ Reacher said. ‘Jogging or something.’
Dixon smiled and moved at his side, warm and lazy.
Neagley said, ‘Dixon doesn’t work out.’
‘Then maybe she’s in the shower.’
‘I’ve tried her twice.’
‘Relax. I’ll try her. Breakfast in a half-hour, downstairs.’
He hung up with Neagley and gave the phone to Dixon and told her to count to sixty and then call Neagley’s room and say she had just gotten out of the bath. Thirty minutes later they were all eating breakfast together in a lounge restaurant full of the noise of slot machines. An hour after that they were back on the Strip, heading for the bar with the fire pit again. 
Waiting for dark was always a long and tedious process. Sometimes the earth seemed to spin fast, and sometimes it seemed to spin slow. This was slow. They were parked in a quite street three blocks from New Age’s factory, opposite sides of the street, Neagley’s Civic facing west, Reacher’s Prelude facing east. They both had a view of the place. Things had changed behind the fence. The assembly workers’ cars were gone from the lot. In their place were six blue Chrysler 300Cs. Clearly operations had been abandoned for the day. The decks had been cleared for the coming battle. Beyond the cars they could see the helicopter in the distance, a quarter-mile away. It was nothing more than a small white shape, but they figured they would be able to tell if it started up. And if it started up, all bets were off.
Reacher had both his phones set to vibrate. Neagley buzzed him twice, to pass the time. She was actually close enough to roll down her window and yell, but he guessed she didn’t want to attract attention.
The first time, she asked, ‘Have you been sleeping with Karla?’
‘When?’ Reacher said, buying time.
‘On this trip.’
‘Twice,’ Reacher said. ‘That’s all.’
‘I’m glad.’
‘Thank you.’
‘You both always wanted to.’
The second time she called was fifteen minutes later.
‘You made a will?’ she asked.
‘No point,’ Reacher said. ‘Now they broke my toothbrush I don’t own anything.’
‘How does that feel?’
‘Bad. I liked that toothbrush. It's been with me a long time.’
‘No, I mean the rest of it.’
‘It feels OK. I don’t see that Karla or Dave are really any happier than me.’
‘Right now they’re not, for sure.’
‘They know we’re coming.’
‘All of us going down together will really cheer them up.’
‘Better than going down alone,’ Reacher said.
A big white semi truck laboured west on I-70 in Colorado, heading for the state of Utah. It was less than half full, a little over sixteen tons in a rig designed for a forty-ton payload. So it was running light, but it was running slow, because of the mountains. It would stay slow until the turn south on I-15. The it would run a little easier, all the way down to California. Its driver had budgeted an average of fifty miles an hour for the whole trip. Eighteen hours maximum, door-to-door. He wasn’t going to take a rest period. How could he? He was a man on a mission, with no time for frivolities.
Azhari Mahoud checked his map for the third time. He figured he needed three hours. Or maybe more. He had to cross just about the whole of Los Angeles, south to north. He wasn’t expecting it to be easy. The U-Haul was slow and a pig to drive, and he was sure that the traffic was going to be awful. If he arrived early, he could wait. No harm in that. He set his alarm and lay down on the bed and tried to will himself to sleep.
Reacher stared straight ahead at the eastern horizon, trying to judge the light. The tint on the windshield didn’t help. It was overly optimistic, optically. It made the sky look darker than it really was. He buzzed his window down and leaned out. In reality, not good. There was still at least an hour of daylight left. Then maybe an hour of dusk. Then full dark. He buzzed the window up and settled back and rested. Forced his heartbeat down and slowed his breathing and relaxed.
He stayed relaxed until Allen Lamaison called him.
