     My name is Edgar Freemantle. I used to be a big deal in the building and
contracting business. This was in Minnesota, in my other life. I learned that my-
other-life thing from Wireman. I want to tell you about Wireman, but first let’s
get through the Minnesota part.
     Gotta say it: I was a genuine American-boy success there. Worked my way
up in the company where I started, and when I couldn’t work my way any higher
there, I went out and started my own. The boss of the company I left laughed at
me, said I’d be broke in a year. I think that’s what most bosses say when some
hot young pocket-rocket goes off on his own.
     For me, everything worked out. When Minneapolis–St. Paul boomed, The
Freemantle Company boomed. When things tightened up, I never tried to play
big. But I did play my hunches, and most played out well. By the time I was
fifty, Pam and I were worth forty million dollars. And we were still tight. We had
two girls, and at the end of our particular Golden Age, Ilse was at Brown and
Melinda was teaching in France, as part of a foreign exchange program. At the
time things went wrong, my wife and I were planning to go and visit her.
     I had an accident at a job site. It was pretty simple; when a pickup truck,
even a Dodge Ram with all the bells and whistles, argues with a twelve-story
crane, the pickup is going to lose every time. The right side of my skull only
cracked. The left side was slammed so hard against the Ram’s doorpost that it
fractured in three places. Or maybe it was five. My memory is better than it used
to be, but it’s still a long way from what it once was.
     The doctors called what happened to my head a contracoup injury, and that
kind of thing often does more damage than the original hit. My ribs were broken.
My right hip was shattered. And although I retained seventy per cent of the sight
in my right eye (more, on a good day), I lost my right arm.
     I was supposed to lose my life, but didn’t. I was supposed to be mentally
impaired thanks to the contracoup thing, and at first I was, but it passed. Sort of.
By the time it did, my wife had gone, and not just sort of. We were married for
twenty-five years, but you know what they say: shit happens. I guess it doesn’t
matter; gone is gone. And over is over. Sometimes that’s a good thing.
When I say I was mentally impaired, I mean that at first I didn’t know who
people were—even my wife—or what had happened. I couldn’t understand why
I was in such pain. I can’t remember the quality of that pain now, four years
later. I know that I suffered it, and that it was excruciating, but it’s all pretty
academic. It wasn’t academic at the time. At the time it was like being in hell
and not knowing why you were there.
    At first you were afraid you’d die, then you were afraid you wouldn’t. That’s
what Wireman says, and he would have known; he had his own season in hell.
    Everything hurt all the time. I had a constant ringing headache; behind my
forehead it was always midnight in the world’s biggest clock-shop. Because my
right eye was fucked up, I was seeing the world through a film of blood, and I
hardly knew what the world was. Nothing had a name. I remember one day
when Pam was in the room—I was still in the hospital—and she was standing by
my bed. I was extremely pissed that she should be standing when there was a
thing to sit on right over in the cornhole.
    “Bring the friend,” I said. “Sit in the friend.”
    “What do you mean, Edgar?” she asked.
    “The friend, the buddy!” I shouted. “Bring over the fucking pal, you dump
bitch!” My head was killing me and she was starting to cry. I hated her for that.
She had no business crying, because she wasn’t the one in the cage, looking at
everything through a red blur. She wasn’t the monkey in the cage. And then it
came to me. “Bring over the chum and sick down!” It was the closest my rattled,
fucked-up brain could come to chair.
    I was angry all the time. There were two older nurses that I called Dry Fuck
One and Dry Fuck Two, as if they were characters in a dirty Dr. Seuss story.
There was a candystriper I called Pilch Lozenge—I have no idea why, but that
nickname also had some sort of sexual connotation. To me, at least. When I grew
stronger, I tried to hit people. Twice I tried to stab Pam, and on one of those two
occasions I succeeded, although only with a plastic knife. She still needed a
couple of stitches in her forearm. There were times when I had to be tied down.
    Here is what I remember most clearly about that part of my other life: a hot
afternoon toward the end of my month-long stay in an expensive convalescent
home, the expensive air conditioning broken, tied down in my bed, a soap opera
on the television, a thousand midnight bells ringing in my head, pain burning
and stiffening my right side like a poker, my missing right arm itching, my
missing right fingers twitching, no more Oxycontin due for awhile (I don’t know
how long, because telling time is beyond me), and a nurse swims out of the red,
a creature coming to look at the monkey in the cage, and the nurse says: “Are
you ready to visit with your wife?” And I say: “Only if she brought a gun to
shoot me with.”
    You don’t think that kind of pain will pass, but it does. Then they ship you
home and replace it with the agony of physical rehabilitation. The red began to
drain from my vision. A psychologist who specialized in hypnotherapy showed
me some neat tricks for managing the phantom aches and itches in my missing
arm. That was Kamen. It was Kamen who brought me Reba: one of the few
things I took with me when I limped out of my other life and into the one I lived
on Duma Key.
    “This is not approved psychological therapy for anger management,” Dr.
Kamen said, although I suppose he might have been lying about that to make
Reba more attractive. He told me I had to give her a hateful name, and so,
although she looked like Lucy Ricardo, I named her after an aunt who used to
pinch my fingers when I was small if I didn’t eat all my carrots. Then, less than
two days after getting her, I forgot her name. I could only think of boy names,
each one making me angrier: Randall, Russell, Rudolph, River-fucking-Phoenix.
    I was home by then. Pam came in with my morning snack and must have
seen the look on my face, because I could see her steeling herself for an outburst.
But even though I’d forgotten the name of the fluffy red rage-doll the
psychologist had given me, I remembered how I was supposed to use it in this
situation.
    “Pam,” I said, “I need five minutes to get myself under control. I can do
this.”
    “Are you sure—”
    “Yes, now just get that hamhock out of here and stick it up your face-powder.
I can do this.”
    I didn’t know if I really could, but that was what I was supposed to say. I
couldn’t remember the fucking doll’s name, but I could remember I can do this.
That’s clear about the end of my other life, how I kept saying I can do this even
when I knew I couldn’t, even when I knew I was fucked, I was double-fucked, I
was dead-ass-fucked in the pouring rain.
    “I can do this,” I said, and God knows how I looked because she backed out
without a word, the tray still in her hands and the cup chattering against the
plate.
    When she was gone, I held the doll up in front of my face, staring into its
stupid blue eyes as my thumbs disappeared into its stupid yielding body. “What’s
your name, you bat-faced bitch?” I shouted at it. It never once occurred to me
that Pam was listening on the kitchen intercom, she and the day-nurse both. Tell
you what, if the intercom had been broken they could have heard me through the
door. I was in good voice that day.
I began to shake the doll back and forth. Its head flopped and its synthetic I
Love Lucy hair flew. Its big blue cartoon eyes seemed to be saying Oouuu, you
nasty man! like Betty Boop in one of those old cartoons you can still see
sometimes on the cable.
    “What’s your name, bitch? What’s your name, you cunt? What’s your name,
you cheap rag-filled whore? Tell me your name! Tell me your name! Tell me
your name or I’ll cut out your eyes and chop off your nose and rip out your—”
    My mind cross-connected then, a thing that still happens now, four years
later, down here in the town of Tamazunchale, state of San Luis Potosí, country
of Mexico, site of Edgar Freemantle’s third life. For a moment I was in my
pickup truck, clipboard rattling against my old steel lunchbucket in the passenger
footwell (I doubt if I was the only working millionaire in America to carry a
lunchbucket, but you probably could have counted us in the dozens), my
PowerBook beside me on the seat. And from the radio a woman’s voice cried “It
was RED!” with evangelical fervor. Only three words, but three was enough. It
was the song about the poor woman who turns out her pretty daughter as a
prostitute. It was “Fancy,” by Reba McEntire.
    “Reba,” I whispered, and hugged the doll against me. “You’re Reba. Reba-
Reba-Reba. I’ll never forget again.” I did—the following week—but I didn’t get
angry that time. No. I held her against me like a little love, closed my eyes, and
visualized the pickup truck that had been demolished in the accident. I visualized
my steel lunchbucket rattling against the steel clip on my clipboard, and the
woman’s voice came from the radio once more, exulting with that same
evangelical fervor: “It was RED!”
    Dr. Kamen called it a breakthrough. He was excited. My wife seemed a good
deal less excited, and the kiss she put on my cheek was of the dutiful variety. I
think it was two months later that she told me she wanted a divorce.
 
     My two-year-old Lexus was in the driveway, but I hadn’t been behind the
wheel of a vehicle since the day of my accident. A kid from the nearby juco ran
errands for me three days a week. Kathi Green was also willing to swing by the
closest supermarket if I asked her, or take me to Blockbuster before one of our
little torture sessions (afterward I was always too wiped out). If you had told me
I’d be driving again that fall, I would have laughed. It wasn’t my bad leg; the
very idea of driving put me in a cold sweat.
     But not long after my shower, that’s what I was doing: sliding behind the
wheel, keying the ignition, and looking over my right shoulder as I backed down
the driveway. I had taken four of the little pink Oxycontin pills instead of the
usual two, and was gambling they’d get me to and from the Stop & Shop near
the intersection of East Hoyt and Eastshore Drive without freaking out or killing
anyone.
     I didn’t tarry at the supermarket. It wasn’t grocery shopping at all in the
normal sense, just a quick bombing-run—one stop at the meat-case followed by
a limping jaunt through the ten-items-or-less express lane, no coupons, nothing
to declare. Still, by the time I got back to Aster Lane I was officially stoned. If a
cop had stopped me, I never would have passed a field sobriety test.
     None did. I passed the Goldsteins’ house, where there were four cars in the
driveway, at least half a dozen more parked at the curb, and lights streaming
from every window. Monica’s mom had called for backup on the chicken-soup
hotline, and it looked like plenty of relatives had responded. Good for them. And
good for Monica.
     Less than a minute later I was turning in to my own driveway. In spite of the
medication, my right leg throbbed from switching back and forth between the
gas and the brake, and I had a headache—a plain old-fashioned tension
headache. My main problem, however, was hunger. It was what had driven me
out in the first place. Only hunger was too mild a word for what I was feeling. I
was ravenous, and the leftover lasagna in the fridge wouldn’t do. There was meat
in it, but not enough.
     I lurched into the house on my crutch, head swimming from the Oxycontin,
got a frypan from the drawer under the stove, and slung it onto one of the
burners. I turned the dial to HIGH, barely hearing the flump of igniting gas. I
was too busy tearing the plastic wrap from a package of ground sirloin. I threw it
in the frypan and mashed it flat with the palm of my hand before scrabbling a
spatula out of the drawer beside the stove.
     Coming back into the house, shucking my clothes and climbing into the
shower, I’d been able to mistake the flutters in my stomach for nausea—it
seemed like a reasonable explanation. By the time I was rinsing away the soap,
though, the flutters had settled into a steady low rumble like the idle of a
powerful motor. The drugs had damped it down a little bit, but now it was back,
worse than ever. If I’d ever been this hungry in my life, I couldn’t remember
when.
     I flipped the grotesquely large meat-patty and tried to count to thirty. I
figured a thirty-count on high heat would be at least a nod in the direction of
what people mean when they say “cooking meat.” If I’d thought to flip on the
fan and vent the aroma, I might have made it. As it was, I didn’t even get to
twenty. At seventeen I snatched a paper plate, flipped the hamburger onto it, and
wolfed the half-raw ground beef while I leaned against the cabinet. About
halfway through I saw the red juice seeping out of the red meat and got a
momentary but brilliant picture of Gandalf looking up at me while blood and shit
oozed from the wrecked remains of his hindquarters, matting the fur on his
broken rear legs. My stomach didn’t so much as quiver, just cried impatiently for
more food. I was hungry.
     Hungry.

     Pam’s father was a retired Marine. He and his wife had relocated to Palm
Desert, California, in the last year of the twentieth century, settling in one of
those gated communities where there’s one token African-American couple and
four token Jewish couples. Children and vegetarians are not allowed. Residents
must vote Republican and own small dogs with rhinestone collars, stupid eyes,
and names that end in i. Taffi is good, Cassi is better, and something like Rififi is
the total shit. Pam’s father had been diagnosed with rectal cancer. It didn’t
surprise me. Put a bunch of white assholes together and you’re going to find that
going around.
     I did not say this to my wife, who started off strong and then broke down in
tears. “He’s started the chemo, but Momma says it might already have metas…
mesass…oh, whatever that fucking word is, I sound like you!” And then, still
sniffing but sounding shocked and humbled: “I’m sorry, Eddie, that was
terrible.”
     “No, it wasn’t,” I said. “It wasn’t terrible at all. And the word is
metastasized.”
  “Yes. Thank you. Anyway, they’re doing the surgery to take out the main
tumor tonight.” She was starting to cry again. “I can’t believe this is happening
to my Dad.”
    “Take it easy,” I said. “They do miracles these days. I’m Exhibit A.”
    Either she didn’t consider me a miracle or didn’t want to go there. “Anyway,
Christmas here is off.”
    “Of course.” And the truth? I was glad. Glad as hell.
    “I’m flying out to Palm tomorrow. Ilse is coming Friday, Melinda on the
twentieth. I’m assuming…considering the fact that you and my father never
really saw eye to eye…”
    Considering the fact that we had once almost come to blows after my father-
in-law had referred to the Democrats as “the Commiecrats,” I thought that was
putting it mildly. I said, “If you’re thinking I don’t want to join you and the girls
for Christmas in Palm Desert, you’re correct. You’ll be helping financially, and I
hope your folks will understand that I had something to do with that—”
    “I hardly think this is the time to drag your goddam checkbook into the
discussion!”
    And the anger was back, just like that. Jack, almost out of his stinking little
box. I wanted to say Why don’t you go fuck yourself, you loudmouth bitch. But
I didn’t. At least partly because it would have come out loudmouf birch or
maybe broadmouth lurch. I somehow knew this.
    Still, it was close.
    “Eddie?” She sounded truculent, more than ready to get into it if I wanted to.
    “I’m not dragging my checkbook into anything,” I said, carefully listening to
each word. They came out all right. That was a relief. “I’m just saying that my
face at your father’s bedside would not be likely to speed his recovery.” For a
moment the anger—the fury—almost added that I hadn’t seen his face at mine,
either. Once more I managed to stop the words, but by then I was sweating.
    “All right. Point taken.” She paused. “What will you do for Christmas,
Eddie?”
    Paint the sunset, I thought. Maybe get it right.
    “I believe that if I’m a good boy, I may be invited to Christmas dinner with
Jack Cantori and his family,” I said, believing no such thing. “Jack’s the young
fellow who works for me.”
    “You sound better. Stronger. Are you still forgetting things?”
    “I don’t know, I can’t remember,” I said.
    “That’s very funny.”
    “Laughter’s the best medicine. I read it in Reader’s Digest.”
    “What about your arm? Are you still having phantom sensations?”
 “Nope,” I lied, “that’s pretty well stopped.”
     “Good. Great.” A pause. Then: “Eddie?”
     “Still here,” I said. And with dark red half-moons in the palms of my hands,
from clenching my fists.
     There was a long pause. The phone lines no longer hiss and crackle as they
did when I was a kid, but I could hear all the miles sighing gently between us. It
sounded like the Gulf when the tide is out. Then she said, “I’m sorry things
turned out this way.”
     “I am, too,” I said, and when she hung up, I picked up one of my bigger
shells and came very close to heaving it through the screen of the TV. Instead, I
limped across the room, opened the door, and chucked it across the deserted
road. I didn’t hate Pam—not really—but I seemed to still hate something. Maybe
that other life.
     Maybe only myself.

     “So,” he said, when I finally reached his table with the striped umbrella
shading it and the empty chair across from his own. “The limping stranger
arriveth, bearing a bread-bag filled with shells. Sit down, limping stranger. Wet
thy whistle. That glass has been waiting for some days now.”
     I put my plastic bag—it was indeed a bread-bag—on the table and reached
across to him. “Edgar Freemantle.”
     His hand was short, the fingers blunt, the grip strong. “Jerome Wireman. I go
by Wireman, mostly.”
     I looked at the beach chair meant for me. It was the kind with a high back
and a low fanny-sling, like the bucket seat in a Porsche.
     “Something wrong with that, muchacho?” Wireman asked, raising an
eyebrow. He had a lot of eyebrow to raise, tufted and half-gray.
     “Not as long as you don’t laugh when I have to get out of it,” I said.
     He smiled. “Honey, live like you got to live. Chuck Berry, nineteen sixty-
nine.”
     I positioned myself beside the empty chair, said a little prayer, and dropped. I
leaned left as always, to spare my bad hip. I didn’t land quite square, but I
grabbed the wooden arms, pushed with my strong foot, and the chair only
teetered. A month before I would have spilled, but I was stronger now. I could
imagine Kathi Green applauding.
     “Good job, Edgar,” he said. “Or are you an Eddie?”
     “Pick your poison, I answer to either. What might you have in that pitcher?”
 “Iced green tea,” he said. “Very cooling. Try some?”
    “I’d love to.”
    He poured me a glass, then topped up his own and raised it. The tea was only
faintly green. His eyes, caught in fine nets of wrinkles, were greener. His hair
was black, streaking in white at the temples, and quite long indeed. When the
wind lifted it, I could see a scar at the top of his hairline on the right side, coin-
shaped but smaller. He was wearing a bathing suit today, and his legs were as
brown as his arms. He looked fit, but I thought he also looked tired.
    “Let’s drink to you, muchacho. You made it.”
    “All right,” I said. “To me.”
    We clinked glasses and drank. I’d had green tea before and thought it was
okay, but this was heavenly—like drinking cold silk, with just a faint tang of
sweetness.
    “Do you taste the honey?” he asked, and smiled when I nodded. “Not
everyone does. I just put in a tablespoonful per pitcher. It releases the natural
sweetness of the tea. I learned that cooking on a tramp steamer in the China
Sea.” He held up his glass and squinted through it. “We fought off many pirates
and mated with strange and dusky women ’neath tropic skies.”
    “That sounds a trifle bullshitty to me, Mr. Wireman.”
    He laughed. “I actually read about the honey thing in one of Miss Eastlake’s
cookery books.”
    “Is she the lady you come out with in the mornings? The one in the
wheelchair?”
    “Indeed she is.”
    And without thinking much about what I was saying—it was her enormous
blue sneakers propped up on the chrome footrests of her wheelchair I was
thinking about—I said: “The Bride of the Godfather.”
    Wireman gaped, those green eyes of his so wide I was about to apologize for
my faux pas. Then he really began to laugh. It was the kind of balls-to-the-wall
bellowing you give out on those rare occasions when something sneaks past all
your defenses and gets to the sweet spot of your funnybone. I mean the man was
busting a gut, and when he saw I didn’t have the slightest idea what had gotten
him, he laughed even harder, his not inconsiderable belly heaving. He tried to
put his glass back on the little table and missed. The glass plummeted straight
down to the sand and stuck there, perfectly upright, like a cigarette-butt in one of
those urns of sand you used to see beside the elevators in hotel lobbies. That
struck him even funnier, and he pointed at it.
    “I couldn’t have done that if I was trying!” he managed, and then was off
again, gale upon gale, heaving in his chair, one hand clutching his stomach, the
"other planted on his chest. A snatch of poetry read in high school, over thirty
years before, suddenly came back to me with haunting clarity: Men do not sham
convulsion, Nor simulate a throe.
     I was smiling myself, smiling and chuckling, because that kind of high
hilarity is catching, even when you don’t know what the joke is. And the glass
falling that way, with every drop of Wireman’s tea staying inside…that was
funny. Like a gag in a Road Runner cartoon. But the plummeting glass hadn’t
been the source of Wireman’s hilarity.
     “I don’t get it. I mean I’m sorry if I—”
     “She sort of is!” Wireman cried, cackling so crazily he was almost
incoherent. “She sort of is, that’s the thing! Only it’s daughter, of course, she’s
The Daughter of the Godfa—”
     But he had been rocking from side to side as well as up and down—no sham,
authentic throe—and that was when his beach chair finally gave up the ghost
with a loud crrrack, first snapping him forward with an extremely comical look
of surprise on his face and then spilling him onto the sand. One of his flailing
arms caught the post of the umbrella and upended the table. A gust of wind
caught the umbrella, puffed it like a sail, and began to drag the table down the
beach. What got me laughing wasn’t the bug-eyed look of amazement on
Wireman’s face when his disintegrating beach chair tried to clamp on him like a
striped jaw, nor his sudden barrel-roll onto the sand. It wasn’t even the sight of
that table trying to escape, tugged by its own umbrella. It was Wireman’s glass,
still standing placidly upright between the sprawling man’s side and left arm.
     Acme Iced Tea Company, I thought, still stuck on those old Road Runner
cartoons. Meep-meep! And that, of course, made me think of the crane that had
done the damage, the one with the fucked-up beeper that hadn’t beeped, and all
at once I saw myself as Wile E. Coyote in the cab of my disintegrating pickup
truck, eyes bugged in bewilderment, frazzled ears sticking off in two opposite
directions and maybe smoking a little at the tips.
     That did it. I laughed until I rolled bonelessly out of my own chair and
plopped onto the sand beside Wireman…but I also missed the glass, which still
stood perfectly upright like a cigarette-butt in an urn of sand. It was impossible
for me to laugh any harder, but I did. Tears gushed down my cheeks and the
world had begun to dim out as my brain went into oxygen-deprivation mode.
     Wireman, still howling, went crawling after his runaway table, locomoting
on knees and elbows. He made a grab for the base and it skittered away as if
sensing his approach. Wireman plowed face-first into the sand and came up
laughing and sneezing. I rolled over on my back and gasped for breath, on the
verge of passing out but still laughing.
That was how I met Wireman.

    It happened again, on the way back, and worse, although Jack didn’t see it—
he was busy piloting the van along Casey Key Road—and I’m pretty sure
Wireman himself never knew. I had asked Jack if he minded skipping the
Tamiami Trail, which is west coast Florida’s engagingly tacky Main Street, in
favor of the narrower, twistier way. I wanted to watch the moon on the water, I
said.
    “Gettin those little artist eccentricities, muchacho,” Wireman said from the
back seat, where he was stretched out with his feet up. He wasn’t much of a
stickler when it came to seatbelts, it seemed. “Next thing we know, you’ll be
wearing a beret.” He pronounced it so it rhymed with garret.
    “Fuck you, Wireman,” I said.
    “I been fucked to the east and I been fucked to the west,” Wireman recited in
tones of sentimental recollection, “but when it comes to the fuckin, yo mamma’s
the best.” With that he lapsed into silence.
    I watched the moon go swimming through the black water to my right. It was
hypnotic. I wondered if it would be possible to paint it the way it looked from
the van: a moon in motion, a silver bullet just beneath the water.
    I was thinking these thoughts (and maybe drifting toward a doze) when I
became aware of ghostly movement above the moon in the water. It was
Wireman’s reflection. For a moment I had the crazy idea that he was jerking off
back there, because his thighs appeared to be opening and closing and his hips
seemed to be moving up and down. I shot a peek at Jack, but the Casey Key
Road is a symphony of curves and Jack was absorbed in his driving. Besides,
most of Wireman was right behind Jack’s seat, not even visible in the rearview
mirror.
    I looked over my left shoulder. Wireman wasn’t masturbating. Wireman
wasn’t sleeping and having a vivid dream. Wireman was having a seizure. It was
quiet, probably petit mal, but it was a seizure, all right; I’d employed an epileptic
draftsman during the first ten years of The Freemantle Company’s existence, and
I knew a seizure when I saw one. Wireman’s torso lifted and dropped four or five
inches as his buttocks clenched and released. His hands jittered on his stomach.
His lips were smacking as though he tasted something particularly good. And his
eyes looked as they had outside the parking garage. By starlight that one-up,
one-down look was weird beyond my ability to describe. Spittle ran from the left
corner of his mouth; a tear from his welling left eye trickled into his shaggy
sideburn.
 It went on for perhaps twenty seconds, then ceased. He blinked, and his eyes
went back where they belonged. He was completely quiet for a minute. Maybe
two. He saw me looking at him and said, “I’d kill for another drink or a peanut
butter cup, and I suppose a drink is out of the question, huh?”
     “I guess it is if you want to make sure you hear her ring in the night,” I said,
hoping I sounded casual.
     “Bridge to Duma Key dead ahead,” Jack told us. “Almost home, guys.”
     Wireman sat up and stretched. “It’s been a hell of a day, but I won’t be sorry
to see my bed tonight, boys. I guess I’m getting old, huh?”
     I didn’t like the idea of stealing from a friend—not even a single X-ray
photograph. Nor did I like keeping silent about what I was sure I’d done to
Candy Brown. I could have told him; after the Tom Riley business, he would
have believed me. Even without that little twinkle of ESP, he would have
believed me. That was the trouble, actually. Wireman wasn’t stupid. If I could
send Candy Brown to the Sarasota County Morgue with a paintbrush, then
maybe I could do for a certain brain-damaged ex-lawyer what the doctors could
not. But what if I couldn’t? Better not to raise false hopes…at least outside of
my own heart, where they were outrageously high.
     By the time I got back to Big Pink, my hip was yelling. I slung my duffle
coat into the closet, took a couple of Oxycontins, and saw the message-light on
my answering machine was blinking.
     It was Nannuzzi. He was delighted to hear from me. Yes indeed, he said, if
the rest of my work was on a par with what he’d seen, the Scoto would be
pleased and proud to sponsor an exhibition of my work, and before Easter, when
the winter people went home. Would it be possible for him and one or more of
his partners to come out, visit me in my studio, and look at some of my other
completed work? They would be happy to bring a sample contract for me to look
at.
     It was good news—exciting news—but in a way it seemed to be happening
on some other planet, to some other Edgar Freemantle. I saved the message,
started to go upstairs with the pilfered X-ray, then stopped. Little Pink wasn’t
right because the easel wasn’t right. Canvas and oil paints weren’t right, either.
Not for this.
     I limped back down to my big living room. There was a stack of Artisan pads
and several boxes of colored pencils on the coffee table, but they weren’t right,
either. There was a low, vague itching in my missing right arm, and for the first
time I thought that I might really be able to do this…if I could find the right
medium for the message, that was.
     It occurred to me that a medium was also a person who took dictation from
the Great Beyond, and that made me laugh. A little nervously, it’s true.
     I went into the bedroom, at first not sure what I was after. Then I looked at
the closet and knew. The week before, I’d had Jack take me shopping—not at the
Crossroads Mall but at one of the men’s shops on St. Armand’s Circle—and I’d
bought half a dozen shirts, the kind that button up the front. When she was a
little kid, Ilse used to call them Big People Shirts. They were still in their
cellophane bags. I tore the bags off, pulled out the pins, and tossed the shirts
back into the closet, where they landed in a heap. I didn’t want the shirts. What I
wanted were the cardboard inserts.
     Those bright white rectangles of cardboard.
     I found a Sharpie in a pocket of my PowerBook carrying case. In my old life
I’d hated Sharpies for both the smell of the ink and their tendency to smear. In
this one I’d come to love the fat boldness of the lines they created, lines that
seem to insist on their own absolute reality. I took the cardboard inserts, the
Sharpie, and the X-ray of Wireman’s brain out to the Florida room, where the
light was bright and declamatory.
     The itch in my missing arm deepened. By now it felt almost like a friend.
     I didn’t have the sort of light-box doctors stick X-rays and MRI scans on
when they want to study them, but the Florida room’s glass wall made a very
acceptable substitute. I didn’t even need Scotch tape. I was able to snap the X-
ray into the crack between the glass and the chrome facing, and there it was, a
thing many claimed did not exist: the brain of a lawyer. It floated against the
Gulf. I stared at it for awhile, I don’t know how long—two minutes? four?—
fascinated by the way the blue water looked when viewed through the gray
crenellations, how those folds changed the water to fog.
     The slug was a black chip, slightly fragmented. It looked a little like a small
ship. Like a rowboat floating on the caldo.
     I began to draw. I had meant only to draw his brain intact—no slug—but it
ended up being more than that. I went on and added the water, you see, because
the picture seemed to demand it. Or my missing arm. Or maybe they were the
same. It was just a suggestion of the Gulf, but it was there, and it was enough to
be successful, because I really was a talented sonofabitch. It only took twenty
minutes, and when I was done I had drawn a human brain floating on the Gulf of
Mexico. It was, in a way, way cool.
     It was also horrifying. It isn’t a word I want to use about my own work, but
it’s unavoidable. As I took the X-ray down and compared it to my picture—slug
in the science, no slug in the art—I realized something I perhaps should have
seen much earlier. Certainly after I started the Girl and Ship series. What I was
doing didn’t work just because it played on the nerve-endings; it worked because
people knew—on some level they really did know—that what they were looking
at had come from a place beyond talent. The feeling those Duma pictures
conveyed was horror, barely held in check. Horror waiting to happen. Inbound
on rotted sails.
 
    There were a dozen or so chairs lined up outside the lobby doors, in what
was a thin but comfortable band of shade at quarter past two in the afternoon.
Half a dozen oldsters were sitting there, watching the traffic on Adalia Street.
Jack was also there, but he was neither watching the traffic nor admiring the
passing ladies. He was tipped back against the pink stucco and reading Mortuary
Science for Dummies. He marked his place and got up as soon as he saw me.
    “Great choice for this state,” I said, nodding at the book with the trademark
google-eyed nerd on the cover.
    “I’ve got to pick a career sometime,” he said, “and the way you’re moving
lately, I don’t think this job is going to last much longer.”
    “Don’t hurry me,” I said, feeling in my pocket to make sure I had my little
bottle of aspirin. I did.
    “Actually,” Jack said, “that’s just what I’m going to do.”
    “Have you got someplace you have to be?” I asked, limping down the
cement walk beside him and into the sunshine. It was hot. There’s spring on the
west coast of Florida, but it only stops for a cup of coffee before heading north to
do the heavy work.
    “No, but you’ve got a four o’clock appointment with Dr. Hadlock in
Sarasota. I think we can just make it, if the traffic’s kind.”
    I stopped him with a hand on the shoulder. “Elizabeth’s doctor? What are
you talking about?”
    “For a physical. Word on the street is you’ve been putting it off, boss.”
    “Wireman did this,” I muttered, and ran my hand through my hair. “Wireman
the doctor-hater. I’ll never let him hear the end of it. You’re my witness, Jack, I
will never—”
    “Nope, he said you’d say that,” Jack said. He tugged me back into motion.
“Come on, come on, we’ll never beat the rush hour traffic if we don’t get
rolling.”
    “Who? If Wireman didn’t make the appointment, then who?”
    “Your other friend. The big black dude. Man, I liked him, he was totally
chilly.”
    We’d reached the Malibu and Jack opened the passenger door for me, but for
a moment I just stood there looking at him, thunderstruck. “Kamen?”
    “Yep. Him and Dr. Hadlock got talking at your reception after the lecture,
and Dr. Kamen just happened to mention that he was concerned because you still
hadn’t had the checkup you’d been promising to get. Dr. Hadlock volunteered to
give you one.”
    “Volunteered,” I said.
Jack nodded, smiling in the bright Florida sunshine. Impossibly young, with
a canary-yellow copy of Mortuary Science for Dummies tucked under his arm.
“Hadlock told Dr. Kamen they couldn’t let anything happen to such an important
newly-discovered talent. And just for the record, I agree.”
     “Thanks a pantload, Jack.”
     He laughed. “You’re a trip, Edgar.”
     “May I assume I’m also chilly?”
     “Yup, you’re a bad refrigerator. Get in, and let’s get back over the bridge
while we still can.”